Vedic Physics 
 
 
 
 

Scientific Origin of Hinduism 
 

Raja Ram Mohan Roy, Ph.D. 
D. 

Golden Egg Publishing, Toronto 
1999 

 



 
Copyright © 1999 by Raja Ram Mohan Roy 
 
 
 
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced or 
transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, 
including photocopying, recording or by any information storage 
and retrieval system without written permission from the author, 
except for the inclusion of brief quotations in a review. 
 
 
 

Published in 1999 by: 
 

Golden Egg Publishing 
1245 Dupont Street R O. 
Box 99045 Toronto, 
Ontario Canada      M6H 
4H7 

Canadian Cataloguing in Publication Data 
 

Roy, Raja Ram Mohan, 1966- 
Vedic physics: scientific origin of Hinduism 

 

Includes bibliographical references and index 
ISBN 0-9684120-0-9 

1. Vedas - Criticism, interpretation, etc. 2. Hinduism I. Title. 

BL1112.27.R69 1999 294.5'921046    C98-931886-9 

Printed and bound in Canada 
 

 



 
 

Dedicated to Vedic Sages 

 



 
 

 



 
 

 



 

 

 



 

 

 



 

 

 



 

PREFACE 
 

Who am I? Why am I here? These are the questions that have arisen 
in my mind since as long as I can remember. Perhaps it was 
because of the Samskara I received from my father, who woke me 
up very early in the morning everyday and recited verses from 
Ramacaritamanasa, when I was a kid. I was spiritually oriented 
from my childhood. As a young boy, I read the Gita regularly and 
tried to follow its teachings. In school Mathematics and Physics 
were my favorite subjects. When I got an opportunity to learn 
Sanskrit in school, I found Sanskrit as fascinating as Mathematics 
and Physics. 

In school and college I kept reading books on Hindu religion 
and philosophy to find the answers to the deepest questions of 
existence. In university I came across relativity and quantum 
mechanics, and found these subjects fascinating. Somewhere deep 
inside I had the feeling that I would find the answers to my quest of 
my existence in the discoveries of modern science. I reasoned that if 
religion presents the true view of reality, then it cannot be 
contradictory to the findings of science. However, they presented 
diametrically opposite views of the same world, and it became a 
question of choosing which one best represents the reality. I kept on 
weighing the evidence, and by the time I had finished my PhD. in 
Materials Science and Engineering at a reputed university in USA, I 
found the evidence to be overwhelmingly in the favor 

 



 

of modern science. May be it was the intellectual environment of 
American universities, or it was my specialization, I had become 
a more materialistic person than I used to be, and I had become 
more or less an atheist. Science presented to me a world without 
a God, a world without any meaning and a world without any 
purpose for existence. This was not a very comfortable position 
to live by, but I was prepared to live with it, if that is what all the 
evidence pointed to. However, somewhere deep inside I had 
doubts, and questions kept on surfacing in my mind. Could 
modern science be wrong somewhere? After all, modern science 
does not explain satisfactorily how randomness can generate 
such complex structures as human beings. As a last attempt to 
find the meaning and purpose of life, I started to read the most 
sacred scripture of Hinduism, the Rgveda. It is a very difficult 
book to follow, with no apparent planning behind its 
organization. It was when I was reading the ninetieth hymn of 
the tenth book of the Rgveda, known as Purusa hymn that an 
idea struck me. This hymn is about the creation of the universe 
from the Supreme Being. The eighth verse talks about the 
creation of domesticated and wild animals. I said to myself that 
so far the creation story was making sense, and suddenly this 
subject of animals has come up. What were animals doing so 
early in creation? Then, I realized suddenly that it was not about 
animals at all. Domesticated animals live together, and wild 
animals live alone. Domesticated animals are symbolic 
representation of particles that live together, and wild animals 
are symbolic representation of particles that live alone. These 
particles, called bosons and fermions, are very familiar to 
physicists. If my reasoning was correct, then it was likely that 
the Vedas are a coded book. After that I started to read the 
Vedas very carefully, wondering about the meaning of each term 
I encountered. Soon it became clear that I was not dealing with 
primitive intelligence here, as all the history books declare. It 
became clear that the Vedic sages had discovered the subtle 

 nature of reality, and coded it in the form of the Vedas. This 

 



 

 

explain the reason why extraordinary steps were taken to preserve 
the Vedas, and the honor given to the Vedas by Hindus, even 
though its meaning is little understood. 
 

One argument that is often invoked to discredit such attempts as 
to finding scientific meaning of scriptures, is why do these 
interpretations are made only after the discovery of the scientific 
facts. I am well aware of this argument, and I have tried to show 
how the scientific meaning of the Vedas is very different from what 
modern science says. The cosmology of the Vedas is completely 
different from modern cosmologies, and without understanding 
Vedic cosmology, the Vedas would seem meaningless. All the 
information that I have used to arrive at my interpretation is 
presented in this book. At some point the reader may start to 
wonder whether all these verses are really there in the scriptures. I 
would like to assure the reader that I have taken extreme care in 
providing the exact references to the sources used in this study. We 
are often told that the Vedas contain very abstruse scientific 
information, but we can not pinpoint to specific verses in the Vedas, 
if we are asked to prove this point. Nothing is said in this book 
without providing the specific location of the verse in the scripture. 
The verses have been translated in English as close as possible to 
the apparent meaning. The scientific meaning of the verse is then 
explained by dissecting the words and providing supporting 
evidence from other scriptures. The reader is encouraged to go to 
the original sources in the case of doubt. I have not made up any 
mantras, and this can be verified easily, as Hindu scriptures are 
thousands of years old, and standard versions of these scriptures are 
easily available. All I have done is to provide a framework in which 
these mantras start to make sense. Once we understand that the 
Rgveda is a book of particle physics and cosmology, men it 
becomes clear by reading the scriptures following the Vedas that 
this ancient science was gradually forgotten over time. It also 
follows that modern science is not the only way to investigate the 
subtle nature of reality. 

 



 

I am indebted to my parents for the Samskara I received from 
them. I would like to express my sincere appreciation to my wife 
Manju for her continued and enthusiastic support to this work. 
Professor Subhash Kak deserves a very special 
acknowledgement for his review, support, advice and 
encouragement. I would also like to thank David Frawley for 
reading the draft and providing critical comments and 
suggestions. 

 
 
 
Raja Ram Mohan Roy 

Toronto, Canada 
August 28, 1998 

 

 



 

FOREWORD 
 

The Vedic texts are a great puzzle to historians. These ancient 
hymns and their prose commentaries ask the most subtle questions 
about the nature of self, questions that the West has started asking 
only recently. What was the cultural context in which Vedic ideas 
arose? Was the mystical basis of Vedic thought connected to a 
comprehensive system of knowledge in which the outer sciences 
had their own place? 

Western scholars have considered spirituality and psychology 
to be the main contribution of Vedic thought. That this is incorrect 
is clear from the recent scholarship that shows that the Vedic 
people knew considerable mathematics, astronomy, medicine and 
other sciences. The chronological frame for Indian culture has also 
undergone a revision. Archaeological studies have shown that there 
is a continuity in Indian culture that goes back to about 8000 B.C. 
The Indian rock art has an even longer prehistory; experts have 
claimed that the oldest paintings are about 40,000 years old. 

Raja Ram Mohan Roy's book adds to this emerging picture 
with an audacious reinterpretation of Vedic system of knowledge. 
Roy's basic premise is that the mind - by analysis, reflection on 
everyday phenomena, and grasping the nature of its own self -can 
discover a considerable amount of science, and this is what the 
Vedic rishis did. He presents a new framework for the 
understanding of the Vedic hymns from the point of view of 
physics and then he draws parallels with recent theories on the 
nature of the universe. 

 



 

 

Roy's method goes counter to the orthodoxy that outer knowledge 
cannot be discovered by an analysis of the inner. But there is 
accumulating evidence from cognitive science and biology that the 
inner and the outer are connected. For example, biological systems are 
equipped with clocks tuned to the motions of the sun, the moon, and 
other astronomical phenomena. Indian thinkers have always insisted on 
the presence of such connections, claiming that this is how the mind is 
able to know the physical world. In Vedic thought this is expressed by 
the notion of "bandhu" that connect the biological, the terrestrial, and 
the astronomical. In this sense, Raja Roy belongs to the classical 
Indian tradition. 

The commonly held view of science is that painstaking 
observations of the regularities in nature led us to the discovery of the 
universal laws. The process began with the planets, then it took on 
terrestrial phenomena, ultimately encompassing biology, genetics, and 
finally the current frontier of brain and mind. This process is stood on 
its head in the Indian texts. They speak of mind and of the nerves in 
the brain and the connections between senses and the outer world. The 
madhu-vidya of the Upanisads is the doctrine of the bandhu, as in 
honey and bees. The Purusa of the cosmos and that of the individual 
are the atman, the immortal Brahman, the whole universe (idam 
sarvam). The bandhu between the large and the subtle include: earth 
and body; water and seed; sun and eye; moon and wind; wind and 
breath; fire and speech; and so on. This is to affirm that knowing 
oneself one can know the world! 

The Vedic focus on mind and consciousness is paralleled by 
the central place of the observer in modern physics. In quantum 
mechanics the state changes in an abrupt fashion when an 
observation is made and this has prompted some physicists to 
claim that consciousness should be a primary category of the 
universe, distinct from physical matter. Not everyone agrees. |There 
are those who claim that consciousness emerges out of the 
complexity of the organization of the brain. But nobody has been 
able to provide a credible model of this process. 

 



 

  

The lowly animals possess abilities of pattern discrimination that 
go beyond any computer. Animal intelligence appears to be a riddle 
and its resolution may lie in the bold ideas of the modern physicists 
that echo the old rishis of the Vedas. Free will cannot be squared with 
scientific determinism, where everything is a part of the web of 
stimulus and response. In this web, how can understanding arise? On 
the other hand, an active consciousness leaves room for freedom. It 
doesn't explain where and how this agency operates within the brain-
machine. That such a paradox remains was known to the Vedic rishis. 
 
 
I described the matter in the form of a verse once: 

 

Crawling the tear between being and becoming 
our exertions create vibrations 
that ease the path 
and change time past. 
If the past is made of stone 
how can there be any freedom 
in our becoming? 
We make history when we observe 
the slashing of the fabric 
of time past and time future 
opens the window on freedom. 
Connections bind us 
from time to non-time 
beyond the seven sounds 
of rivers 
bells 
brazen vessels wheels of 
carriage croakings of frogs 
rain 
the echo in the cavern. 

 



 

 

The Vedic hymns are full of statements that, if taken literally, 
make no sense. It is also full of riddles and unusual images. One 
needs to define a suitable context to understand why horses may 
have wings or the cosmic man has thousand heads, thousand eyes, 
and thousand feet. The tripartite model of knowledge at the basis of 
the hymns helps in their understanding. Roy claims we can go even 
further by considering specific physical associations for Vedic gods. 
Roy has views on the archaeology of ancient India also. He claims 
that the Sindhu-Sarasvati cultural tradition is the locus of the Vedic 
people. This claim is being increasingly made by scholars and so 
Roy is not alone. He uses this identity, together with his interpretive 
apparatus, to propose solution to several old problems related to the 
Harappan civilization. 

But could the Vedic rishis have anticipated physics with its 
categories of different kinds of particles and forces? Certainly not in 
the direct sense that physics is described now. That the rishis did 
anticipate subtle notions of potential and atomic structure is known 
through the systems of Samkhya and Vaisesika. It is plausible that 
they had an intuitive idea of more categories, not systematized in 
the darsanas. Did they do so from the patterns the outer senses and 
the inner instrument of the mind create? And do these patterns 
conform to the nature of the physical universe? In other words, can 
we say if there is an ultimate book of physics then it can also be 
read by decrypting the nature of our senses? 

Roy's book is a bold, new way of looking at Vedic physics. 
Since he is a pioneer, this is not the place to quibble with the details 
of his story. We celebrate the new path he has hewn through the 
bush of old scholarship. It is the task of future researchers to further 
sharpen and modify the ideas of Roy. 

 
Subhash Kak, Ph. D. author of The Astronomical 

Code of the Rgveda 
Tulum, Yucatan August 

12,1998 

 



 

 

 



 

"In ancient and modern times, wonderful ideas have been carried forward 
from one race to another. It has been always with the blast of trumpets and 
the march of embattled cohorts. Each idea had to be soaked in a deluge of 
blood. Each word of power had to be followed by the groans of millions, by 
the wails of orphans, by the tears of widows. This, many other nations have 
taught, but India for thousands of years peacefully existed. Ideas after ideas 
have marched out from her, but every word has been spoken with a blessing 
behind it and peace before it. We, of all nations of the world, have never 
been a conquering race, and that blessing is on our head, and therefore we 
live." 

- Swami Vivekananda 
 

1. Vedic Legacy 

"Veda is the source of all Dharma" declares Manusmrti 2.6. As we 
shall see this statement is no exaggeration. There is no major 
religion on this planet, which has not been influenced by the Vedas. 
The creation stories of all major religions are based on the Vedas. 
Though all other religions have forgotten their Vedic foot or have 
been forgotten, there is one religion, Hinduism that has kept the 
flame of the Vedic wisdom burning continuously. In order to 
understand Hinduism, we have to go five thousand years back in 
time to the region on both sides of the Indo-Pakistani border for 
here a mighty civilization once arose, and from the 

 1



 
 

scientific achievements of these people a way of life emerged, 
which was later termed Hinduism. This civilization is called Indus 
Valley Civilization, and their scientific knowledge was coded in 
the sacred books called "Vedas". Veda means knowledge and is 
derived from root "Vida" meaning to know. The knowledge was 
passed from generation to generation with the explicit instructions 
that no matter what happened not a single letter of this body of 
knowledge should be changed. Great care was taken to preserve 
the Vedas, and we are fortunate that it has come to us in the same 
form it was intended. 
The Vedas are the foundation of Hinduism and the most 
authoritative of all Hindu scriptures, which are divided in two 
groups. The first group is called Sruti, meaning heard, and the 
second group is called Smrti, meaning memory. In a liberal sense, 
the Vedas, the Brahmanas, the Aranyakas and the Upanisads are 
considered Sruti, while in a conservative sense only the Vedas are 
considered Sruti. Rest of the scriptures including the Dharma 
Sastras and the Puranas are considered Smrti. There are four 
Vedas: Rgveda, Yajurveda, Samaveda, and Atharvaveda. The 
Vedas are considered Apauruseya meaning not authored by a 
human being. Traditional viewpoint is that the Vedas were heard 
by sages during deep meditation and are work of God. Somewhat 
in contrast with the viewpoint of different sages receiving the 
Vedic knowledge at different epochs is another traditional 
viewpoint that the Vedas were given to mankind in the beginning 
of the creation by God. Here we have to make a distinction 
between the knowledge contained in the Vedas and when that 
knowledge was discovered. The electron had existed before it was 
discovered. As we will see in this book, the Vedas are abort 
ancient cosmology. The laws governing the evolution of the 
universe have existed from the beginning of the universe. This 
explains why the Vedas are as old as the universe. However, the 
viewpoint of the Vedas being received by mankind in the 
beginning is wrong, because there were no human beings back 

 2



 

then. Trie major contention of this book is that the Vedas were 
discovered at the dawn of Indus Valley Civilization, and therefore 
the Vedas have been discovered only 5000 years ago. 
 

1.1: The Vedas 
 
 
What are the Vedas about? Are they product of primitive minds, 
who were expressing the natural phenomena of rain, clouds and 
thunder as medieval commentators describe? Are they songs of 
pastoral people as modern historians say? Have Hindus been 
wrong all along? Why did Hindus have so much respect for a book 
that is seemingly about cows and horses, about rain and clouds? 
What is that extraordinary knowledge in the Vedas, so that Indians 
for thousands of years have considered it as the source of all 
knowledge? In Manusmrti 2.7, the Vedas are told to be the books 
of all fields of knowledge. In Sanskrit the word for believer is 
"Astika". In other parts of world a believer means one who 
believes in God. In India it was not so. Astika meant one who 
believed in the Vedas. Manusmrti 2.11 declares that "nastiko 
vedanindakah" meaning one who criticizes the Vedas is a non-
believer. One may not believe in God and still can be a believer. 

The most authoritative among the four Vedas is called 
Rgveda. Other three Vedas contain several verses that are found 
in the Rgveda also. Each verse in the Rgveda is set to a metre 
called Chanda and has pronunciation marks called Svara. Each 
verse has one or more sages (Rsis) and deities (Devatas) 
associated with it. Rsis are supposed to have written or received 
the verse, and Devatas are supposed to be the gods in whose 
praise the verse has been written. Nirukta 2.11 describes Rsi as 
one who has seen the mantras. There are big problems with this 
traditional viewpoint. Several of the sages as well as deities are 
animals or inanimate objects like fish, frog, rivers and stones. 
Several verses have more than one sages and deities. There is a 
very simple 

 3



 
 

solution to this problem.The Rgveda is the book of ancient 
cosmology, where the authors have chosen fundamental particles 
and forces of nature to describe the cosmology in a dramatic way. 
Sages are not the authors of the verses, but they are also 
fundamental particles and forces, and so are the deities. Thus the 
sages Vasistha and Visvamitra are not sages, and deities Mitra and 
Varuna are not gods, but they all have precise scientific meaning. 
This viewpoint puts a constraint on each mantra. The sage and deity 
of the mantra must be present at the epoch described by the mantra. 
For example when a mantra describes what was there before the 
creation, the sage and the deity of that mantra can not be what was 
not there before the creation. The Purusa hymn of the Rgveda 
(10.90) describes the moment of creation, and we find that the sage 
and the deity both of this hymn are God himself, because nothing 
else was present at that time» The scientific interpretation of the 
Vedas also explains why there are no hymns dedicated to Aryama, 
because dedication of hymns itself has a scientific meaning. We will 
learn more about this when we discuss Aryama later in this book. 

A great deal of effort has gone into passing the Vedas in their 
original form. The Vedas were passed on orally, but it is a vast 
body of literature, and very minor changes crept in among the 
different teachers. This gave rise to different branches of the Vedas, 
which are nearly the same. They vary sometimes in pronunciation 
of the words, or sometimes have words replaced by other words 
with similar meaning apparently to clear the confusion in the 
meaning of the verse, and in very rare cases replacement of a verse 
by another. Saunaka has mentioned five branches of the Rgveda, 
but currently only one of them called Sakala is available. The 
Yajurveda has two branches, which differ significantly from each 
other. One of them is called Sukla or the white Yajurveda, and the 
other is called Krsna or the black Yajurveda. Mahidhara in his 
commentary on the white Yajurveda gives a strange story about 
how the Yajurveda became two. 

 4



 

Vaisampayana taught the Yajurveda to Yajnavalkya, and once he got 
upset with him. So he asked Yajfiavalkya to return the Yajurveda. 
Yajfiavalkya vomited the Yajurveda by the practice of Yoga, and other 
students of Vaisampayana ate it by taking the form of birds (Tittiri). 
Thus the Yajurveda became black, and this branch is called the 
Taittiriya Samhita. Yajfiavalkya prayed to sun and sun came in form 
of a horse (Vajin) to return the Yajurveda. Thus the white Yajurveda is 
called the Vajasaneyl Samhita. What seems likely is that the Yajurveda 
has been written in two parts originally based on some scientific 
considerations. There are references to twelve branches of the black 
Yajurveda in Puranas, out of which three are available called 
Taittiriya, Maitrayani and Katha Samhita. Seventeen branches of the 
white Yajurveda are mentioned, but only two are available called 
Vajasaneyl or Madhyandina Samhita and Kanva Samhita. Normally 
when the Yajurveda is mentioned, the Vajasaneyl branch of the white 
Yajurveda is meant. Three branches of the Samaveda are available 
currently, Kauthuma, Ranayaniya and Jaiminlya, the first one being 
the most popular. Patanjali has referred to nine branches of the 
Atharvaveda, but only two have survived, Paippalada and Saunaka, 
latter being the more popular. 

The Atharvaveda has been the subject of intense discussion among 
scholars, many of whom do not even accept it as part of the Vedas. 
Some scholars even go to the extent of saying that there is only one 
Veda, the Rgveda. Whatever be the case, it is accepted by everyone 
that the Rgveda is the oldest Veda and the most authentic. This book is 
mostly concerned with the Rgveda, and shows that the Rgveda is a 
book of cosmology. I have quoted other Vedas and later scriptures in 
order to interpret and corroborate the meaning of the Rgveda. Once the 
physics of the Rgveda is completely understood, I believe that other 
Vedas can be tested for their authenticity. As the Rgveda is a book of 
cosmology, it obviously follows that there is no human history in the 
Rgveda. 

 5



 
 

1.2: The Vedas and Cosmology 
 
Whether there is human history in the Vedas or not, has been a 
subject of controversy from the beginning. The Vedas are considered 
eternal and logic demands that an eternal book can not contain 
mundane stories about human beings. While most commentators 
agreed with this view, many of them still elaborated about several 
Vedic themes as history. The main reason being that they hardly had 
any clue as to what the Vedas were about. The Vedas have been 
extensively studied and commented on by Indian intellectuals for all 
through history. Several of them certainly had the idea that the Vedas 
are about cosmology, but by that time the scientific means by which 
the Vedas were discovered and disseminated were lost. With the rise 
of modern science it should have been feasible to crack the Vedic 
code at least three decades earlier, but here lies the greatest tragedy 
of India. Under the Marxist grip Indian intellectuals have been made 
ashamed of their heritage, and most educated Hindus are ready to 
parade with the banner "We are ashamed to be Hindu" at the drop of 
a hat. Most educated Indians including scientists have no clue as to 
what is in the Vedas. The Vedas are written in Sanskrit and most 
educated Indians can not understand it as there is a conspiracy to 
finish Sanskrit and everything else that Hindus should be proud of. 
There are very few Vedic scholars left in India. Study of the Vedas is 
in the state of rapid decline. The families which recite and remember 
the Vedas can be counted on fingers. The Vedic scholars have little 
knowledge of modern science, and scientists have little knowledge of 
the Vedas, and for this reason the real meaning of the Vedas has 
eluded us. Many Vedic scholars have come to the conclusion that the 
Vedas are primarily concerned with cosmology, however they are 
not in a position to show that Vedic cosmology has the solutions to 
the most difficult problems of modern cosmology. Yudhisthira 
Mimamsaka writes[1]: 

 6



 

From the study of the Vedic literature several times I have come 
to the conclusion that Srauta Yajnas are only a representation of the 

evolution of the universe from its beginning to the end. Like dramas 
are played to remember history, the process of various Srauta Yajnas 
describes the science of cosmology" 

 

He could not have said it better, but the problem is that Vedic 
scholars and modern scientists have never sat together to discover the 
ultimate secret of the cosmos. 
1.3: The Indus Valley Civilization and the MahabharataWar 
 

The knowledge contained in the Vedas is very abstruse, and is well 
beyond the comprehension of ordinary human beings. Therefore 
Vedic sages coded the knowledge in a simple form in which it could 
be understood by everyone. The Rgveda itself testifies that it has a 
hidden meaning in verse 4.3.16. Sage Bharata in his Natyasastra 1.23 
refers to the sages who knew the hidden meaning of the Vedas. This 
coding of knowledge proved to be very successful in disseminating 
the knowledge to common folks, which is evident from the seals 
found in the Indus Valley Civilization. Almost all the seals have 
Vedic motif and the writings also represent Vedic ideas. The people 
of the Indus Valley Civilization seem preoccupied with Vedic 
knowledge, which is only understandable considering that they 
possessed the scientific knowledge from which even modern 
scientists can learn. For nearly a thousand years there was little 
change in the life of the Vedic people. There must have been 
scientific ways through which this knowledge was obtained. On the 
eve of "Mahabharata war" our ancestors believed that their knowledge 
was in the danger of being lost. They anticipated the disaster that was 
coming, and deliberated about how to save the Vedic knowledge. 
They could have written it down, but writings could be destroyed. 
Therefore 

 7



 
 

they decided that they will organize the Vedic knowledge and instruct 
pupils to memorize it, who will pass it on orally. The chief Vedic 
scientist was Krsna Dvaipayana also known as Vedavyasa, who taught 
the Rgveda to Paila, the Samaveda to Jaimini, the Yajurveda to 
Vaisampayana and the Atharvaveda to Sumantu (Bhagavata 1.4.21). 
They taught it to other pupils and they in turn to more other pupils. 
These pupils spread in every direction and tried to preserve the Vedas 
from disappearing. 

1.4: Avesta 
 
One group reached Iran and started to practice Vedic Dharma there. 
The religious scripture of ancient Iranians was the Avesta. The Avesta 
available today is only a fraction of what existed thousands of years 
ago. When Alexander captured Iran in 326 B.C. after a bloody war, he 
destroyed each copy of the Avesta available. After return of political 
stability Persian priests tried to salvage the Avesta and much was 
written out of memory. But bad luck returned again to Persians in 
seventh century when they were defeated by Muslim invaders in 642 
A.D. Within a hundred years Persians were forcibly converted to 
Islam. A few Persians fled Iran in search of a place where they could 
freely worship and follow their religion. They returned to their original 
homeland in India where they are a thriving community called Parasis. 
The Avesta is divided in five parts: (1) Yajna, of which Gatha is a part, 
(2) Vispareda, (3) Vendidada, (4) Yasta, and (5) Khurda Avesta. 
Avesta can also be divided in two parts : main Avesta and Khurda 
Avesta. Main Avesta includes Yasna, Vispareda, Vendidada, and 
Yasta. There is remarkable similarity between the language of the 
Vedas and the Gatha. Several words are common or there is a 
difference of one letter. Grammar and meters are also similar. 

 8



 
1.5: Brahmanas 
 
 

After the Mahabharata war the knowledge contained in the Vedas was 
gradually lost. As the knowledge contained in the Vedas started to 
make no sense at all, it became difficult to preserve the knowledge. To 
preserve the meaning of the Vedas, commentaries on the Vedas were 
written. These are called the Brahmanas, and most comprehensive of 
them is the Satapatha Brahmana. To preserve the structure of the Vedas, 
Pratisakhya books, Siksa books and Anukramanika books were written. 

All Brahmanas are associated with a Veda. The Aitareya Brahmana 
and the Kausitaki Brahmana are associated with the Rgveda. The 
Brahmana of the Taittiriya branch of the black Yajurveda is the 
Taittiriya Brahmana. The Satapatha Brahmana is the Brahmana of the 
white Yajurveda. The Jaiminiya Brahmana is the major Brahmana 
related to the Samaveda, minor Brahmanas being Samavidhana, 
Devatadhyayi, Vamsa and Samhitopanisada Brahmana. The Gopatha 
Brahmana is related to the Atharvaveda. 

 

The Satapatha Brahmana is a milestone in the development of the 
Vedic literature. Several centuries must have passed between the 
Mahabharata war and the writing of the Satapatha Brahmana, because 
the Satapatha Brahmana shows a significant loss of Vedic science. 
There are several new ideas in the Satapatha Brahmana that are not 
present in the Vedas. There is hardly any legend of creation among the 
ancient world, the seed of which can not be shown to be in the 
Satapatha Brahmana. Second wave of emigration from India happened 
after the composition of the Satapatha Brahmana, and a prominent 
group among them settled in Greece. Greek mythology is a direct 
borrowing from the Satapatha Brahmana. Many of the Greek legends 
are not found in the Vedas, but found in die Satapatha Brahmana, and 
this fact puts a big hole in the theory of original homeland being other 
than India. If all Indo-Europeans races had some other homeland 

 

 9



 
 

from which they dispersed, then Greek legends should match Vedas 
and not the Satapatha Brahmana. The contention of this book is that 
India is the cradle of civilization, and at least three major emigrations 
from India have taken place at different epochs, first after the 
Mahabharata war, second after the composition of the Satapatha 
Brahmana and third after the composition of early Puranas. The Gods 
are same in the Vedas and the Brahmanas. A new god Prajapati comes 
in the picture in the Brahmanas. All gods are described as born from 
Prajapati. 

1.6: Aranyakas and Upanisads 
 
Aranyaka means pertaining to forest and Upanisad means to sit near. 
Similar to the Brahmanas, the Aranyakas and the Upanisads are also 
related to the Vedas. Aitareya and Sankhyayana Aranyakas are 
connected to the Rgveda, Tavalkara and Chandogya Aranyakas to the 
Samaveda, Taittiriya and Maitrayani Aranyakas to the black 
Yajurveda and Brhadaranyaka to the white Yajurveda. Aitareya and 
Kausitaki Upanisads are related to the Rgveda, Chandogya Upanisad 
and Kenopanisad to the Samaveda, Kathopanisad, Taittiriya, Maitri 
and Svetasvatara Upanisads to the black Yajurveda, Brhadaranyaka 
and Isa Upanisads to the white Yajurveda, and Mundaka, Mandukya 
and Prasna Upanisads to the Atharvaveda. Note that the Brahmanas 
and the Upanisads both are based on the Vedas, and therefore the 
Upanisads are not a product of rebellion from the ritualism of the 
Brahmanas. The Upanisads contain most beautiful expressions of 
human thought. In Taittiriya Upanisad 1.11 a teacher gives the 
following advice to new graduates: 
 
"Speak only the truth, follow the Dharma, do not be heedless about 
self-study. Mother is god, father is god, teacher is god, guest is god. 
Only perform those actions which are blameless, nothing 

 10



 

else. Follow only those of our behavior, which are good, not the 
others." 

1.7: Sutra Literature 
 

The Sutra period is considered later than the Brahmana period. The 
style of the Sutras is completely opposite of the Brahmanas. While the 
Brahmanas are very elaborate in their treatment of any subject, the 
Sutras take recourse to extreme brevity. The Sutra literature is of three 
types: Kalpasutra or Srautasutra, Grhyasutra and Dharmasutra. 

Sankhayana and Asvalayana Srautasutras are related to the 
Rgveda, Masaka, Latyayana and Drahyayana Srautasutras to the 
Samaveda, Katyayana Srautasutra is related to the white Yajurveda, 
Apastamba, Hiranyakesina and Baudhayana Srautasutras to the black 
Yajurveda, and Vaitana Srautasutra to the Atharvaveda. The 
Srautasutras describe the rituals related to Yajnas. 

Sankhayana and Asvalayana Grhyasutras are connected to the 
Rgveda, Gobhila Grhyasutra to the Samaveda, Paraskara Grhyasutra 
to the white Yajurveda, Apastamba Grhyasutra to the black 
Yajurveda, and Kausika Grhyasutra to the Atharvaveda. The 
Grhyasutras describe the rituals to be performed from birth to death 
for a Hindu. 

The Dharmasutras are not specifically related to individual 
Vedas. Dharmasutras of Apastamba, Hiranyakesina and Baudhayana 
are presently available. Dharmasutras discuss the behavior of Hindus 
in their day-to-day life. 
 
 

1.8: Vedangas, Parisistas and Anukramanis 
 

Vedanga means organ of the Veda and Parisista means appendix. 

 11



 
 

Vedangas are considered very important to study the Vedas. There 
are six Vedangas: Siksa (Pronunciation), Chanda (Meter), 
Vyakarana (Grammar), Nirukta (Etymology), Jyotisa (Astronomy) 
and Kalpa (Ceremonial). Siksa texts are Pratisakhyas of Rgveda, 
Yajurveda and Atharvaveda. Parisista means appendix, and 
Parisistas explain the meaning of Sutras. Presently available 
Parisistas are Asvalayanagrhyaparisista, Gobhila Samgraha Parisista 
and Chandogyagrhya Parisista. Anukramanis list the order of verses 
and other information related to the organization of the Vedas. 

1.9: Puranas 
 
Puranas are the latest among Hindu scriptures. What is present as a 
seed in the Vedas, takes the form of a big tree in the Puranas. There 
are eighteen major Puranas, which are called the Mahapuranas. 
There are eighteen minor Puranas called the Upapuranas. The 
Puranas are voluminous. The Srimadbhagavata Mahapurana 
consists of eighteen thousand verses. The Puranas deal with five 
subjects: Sarga (creation of the universe), Pratisarga (dissolution of 
the universe), Vamsa (lineage), Manvantara (epochs), and 
Vamsanucarita (history). Most Hindus get their knowledge of 
Hinduism from the Puranas, which represent the popular form of 
Hinduism. 

From the Vedas to the Puranas we have a complete record of the 
development of Hindu society. The Vedas provide the solid 
foundation on which the magnificent palace of Hinduism has been 
erected. However, the Vedas are so far removed from us, that we 
have only retained a memory of the Vedas providing our foundation 
and have completely forgotten what the Vedas really represent. 

 12



 1.10: Meanings of the Vedas 
 
 
The Rgveda on the face of it seems to be a book about cows, horses 
and other mundane matters without any kind of organization. Why 
will such a book be considered the book of all knowledge since time 
immemorial? Only explanation is that the Rgveda has a hidden 
meaning. The Rgveda clearly mentions that it has a secret meaning in 
following verse: 
 

"The Vedic mantras are in the never-decaying remotest sky, where 
all the gods reside. One who does not know that, what will he do 
with the Vedic mantras? One who knows that, gods stay with 
him." Rgveda 1.164.39 

 

The hidden names of the gods are mentioned in Rgveda 
1.164.5,5.3.2,5.3.3,5.5.10, and 9.95.2. Thus it has always been 
understood that the Rgveda has a meaning very different from its • 
apparent meaning. As the loss of the Vedic science continued after the 
period of the Brahmanas, new meanings were given to the Vedas. There 
were two possibilities, either mantras could be altered to provide the 
new meaning or new meaning could be given to the words occurring in 
the mantras. Fortunately, mantras were not altered, rather commentators 
wrote volumes about what each word in each mantra meant. As there 
was no standard for doing this exercise, some words came to mean a 
multitude of things. For example the word "Gau" which means cow 
came to have 47 different meanings including rays of sun and milk. Ahi 
which means serpent is often translated as cloud. Mitra, Varuna, Savita, 
Aditya, Indra all came to mean sun, even though they have completely 
different meaning in the Rgveda. Indra is often described in the Rgveda 
as the one who created and placed sun in the heaven, still he was later 
identified with sun. As each word came to mean a multitude of things, 
any mantra could now be given hundreds of meaning. There are several 
translations of 

 

 13



 
 

the Vedas available currently, and one finds that for the same verse 
translations are as different as possible. 
If we think about it, there is clearly a paradox here. Vedas are 
supposed to be so carefully compiled that even changing a letter was 
not allowed for thousands of years for the fear that its meaning will 
be lost, and on the other hand we are led to believe that our revered 
sages were so careless that they could not even use proper words. 
Why would the Vedic sages use the word for cow when they mean 
ray of light and the word for serpent when they mean cloud? In fact 
each word is very carefully thought and means exactly what it says. It 
is not the Vedic sage who declared that "Gau" means solar ray, but 
later day commentators, who had forgotten the meaning of mantras. 
In this book, we are going to discover an incredibly simpler picture. 
We will reduce the meaning of the Vedic mantras to exactly two: one 
what it literally says, that is the apparent meaning and other the 
scientific interpretation, that is the actual meaning. I will be quoting 
Vedic mantras very liberally, often I will be translating complete 
hymns. I have done so for several reasons. For one, I don't want to 
prove my point by selective quotation. Second, most educated Indians 
are very ignorant of what is in the Rgveda. This is a nice place to 
know a little bit more about the most sacred book of the Hindus and 
the first book of human race. Third and most important, what I have 
discovered is only the tip of the iceberg. I expect my learned readers 
to contribute in discovering the Vedas, and it is very important that I 
give my readers as much information as possible. The translation of 
the Vedic mantras in this book follows a very simple rule. I have tried 
to translate the mantras as close as possible to the apparent meaning, 
and then I have tried to explain its actual meaning. Thus I have 
translated Savita as Savita, Indra as Indra, Surya as Surya, Ahi as 
serpent, Gau as cow and so on. This is the most important point in 
rediscovering the Vedas. Unless the reader knows what exactly is the 
meaning of the mantras, the scientific meaning will elude the reader. 
For example a verse 

 14



 

 
from the Rgveda says the following: 
 

"Indra created cows from serpent for Trita."    Rgveda 10.48.2 
 

Satavalekara[2] translates it as "Indra created waters from cloud for 
Trita". This mantra does not make any sense unless the real meaning of 
cows and serpent are known, and therefore Gau (cow) received an 
additional meaning of water, and Ahi (serpent) received an additional 
meaning of cloud. In this book I will discuss the real meaning of Gau 
and Ahi, and then a great cosmic secret will be revealed by this mantra. 
Most translations of the Vedas differ from each other, because the 
translator is trying to put meaning in the mantras that are simply not 
there. The translations in this book are based on my own reading of the 
mantras in Sanskrit, and a number of books on the Vedas [2-7]. 

When actual meaning of the Vedas was forgotten, and several 
meanings were imposed on each word of the Vedas, it became easy to 
insert a lot of meaning to the Vedas that was simply not there. As none 
of these meanings justified the honor given to the Vedas, scholars 
started to believe that there were still more meanings hidden in the 
Vedas, and finally a tradition started that the Vedas contain all the 
knowledge that is there to acquire. This viewpoint is certainly wrong, 
as the Vedas have a certain number of mantras, and there is only a 
certain number of ways it can be interpreted. When new interpretations 
were given to the knowledge, most of the Vedas were explained as 
describing natural phenomena involving sun, cloud and rain. The 
cosmology of the Vedas was completely forgotten, and the fundamental 
particles and forces of nature were deified. The interaction of particles 
and forces was transformed into human history that went Bullions of 
years back in time. In the confusion that was created, it became easy for 
ideologically motivated historians to deny Hindus the most glorious 
epoch of Hinduism. Today the Vedas have returned in their pristine 
glory to clear all confusion, 

 15



 
 

and establish the reign of truth. One major problem in ascertaining the 
truth is to know when the Vedas were composed. 

1.11: Dating of the Vedas 
 
Tradition believes that the Vedas are as old as the universe itself, and 
many Vedic scholars still try to adhere to this position. This viewpoint 
is clearly wrong, and arises from the confusion between when the 
Vedas were written and what is in the Vedas. The knowledge 
contained in the Vedas is as old as the universe because the Vedas are 
about the evolution of the universe, while the Vedas have been 
discovered only very recently. The Vedas do not give any clue as to 
when they were written, so scholars have resorted to other methods in 
determining the age of the Vedas. 
 
One of the most illogical method was adopted by Max Muller, famous 
Vedic scholar of last century, and regrettably it is the most popular up 
till now. Max Muller believed in the Biblical creation, and calculated 
the age of the Vedas as follows[8]. He assumed the creation to have 
taken place on October 23, 4004 B.C., and then using the biblical 
chronology deluge is placed in the year 2448 B.C. He granted a 
thousand years for the floods to subside, thus arriving at 1400 B.C. for 
the Aryan invasion of India. He allowed 200 years as the time to get 
familiar with the new home, thus calculating 1200 B.C. as the date for 
the composition of the Vedas. Of course, he did not provide this 
reasoning for his dating of the Vedas to general public, but worked 
backwards to give the same chronology he had already calculated. He 
fixed 600 B.C. for the date of Buddha, allotted 200 years each for 
Chandas, Mantra and Brahmana period. Thus the Brahmanas were 
composed during 800-600 B.C., Mantra portion of the Vedas 
composed during 1000-800 B.C. and Chandas portion of the Vedas 
(e.g. Rgveda) was composed during 1200-1000 B.C. Obviously there 
is no scientific reason as to why it should take only 200 

 16



 

years each and not 500 or 1000 years for the composition of 
Chandas, Mantras and Brahmanas. Later Max Muller disowned his 
chronology and said that no power on earth can determine when the 
Vedas were written. 

Tilak and Jacobi resorted to astronomical dating of the Vedas. 
They interpreted few verses of the Rgveda to come to the 
conclusion that these verses describe the time period of 4500 B.C. 
This method is also highly questionable. There is no indication in 
the Rgveda to suggest that it is a book of astronomy, and the few 
verses that have been interpreted to contain astronomical 
information are highly mystical. The astronomical information is 
arrived by assuming meanings of the words very different from the 
apparent meanings, and remains entirely unconvincing. For 
example in his book Orion, Tilak interprets Rbhus to mean seasons, 
Vasta (he-goat) to mean sun and hound to mean Canis Major in 
Rgveda 1.161.13. These meanings can only be considered to be 
imposed on the verse. Tilak uses a verse from Gita in which Lord 
Krsna says that he is Margasirsa among the months and spring 
among the seasons. Tilak considers this verse to contain the 
memory of those days when Margasirsa used to fall during spring 
about 10,000 years ago. Again, this is not a logical argument. The 
two statements about months and seasons are completely 
independent and there is no reason to see a connection there. Thus 
astronomical dating of the Vedas stands on very shaky grounds. 

Some other scholars have tried to prove the antiquity of the 
Vedas by performing geological dating. Rgveda 10.136.5 talks 
about seas in the east and west, which can not be applied to the 
area where the Vedas are supposed to have been composed. A. C. 
Das in his book Rgvedic India[9] takes the antiquity of the Vedas 
to beyond 25,000 years in order to justify the verses like this. As 
the reader will see in this book, the Rgveda is a coded book, and 
the rivers, mountains and seas of the Rgveda do not refer to these 
objects at all. Thus geological dating of the Vedas 

 17



 
 

is a futile exercise. 
How are we then to know about the time when the Vedas were 

composed? Fortunately, there is a very simple way of dating the 
Vedas. We should remember that the Vedas did not exist by 
themselves, but the book that is considered so sacred in India, must 
have been lived by the people. Their lifestyle and belief system will 
show a clear mark of the Vedas. If we could find those people, then 
we will know the date of the Vedas. Hinduism is a dynamic religion, 
which has changed its form with the passage of time. We can date our 
scriptures by matching them with the archaeological artifacts. As I 
tried to do this exercise for the Rgveda, I found a striking match with 
the Indus Valley Civilization. This is only to be expected. The Rgveda 
is the oldest of our scriptures and the Indus Valley Civilization is the 
oldest age of Indian civilization, therefore it is no surprise that they 
match each other. We will see in this book that the Indus Valley seals 
represent Vedic ideas, thus proving without doubt that this civilization 
was Vedic civilization and the Rgveda was written at the beginning of 
this civilization. This gives a date of 3000 B. C. for the composition of 
the Rgveda. 

1.12: Commentators of the Vedas 
 
The first commentator of the Vedas is Yaska. By his time scientific 
meaning of the Vedas was mostly lost, and Hindus were looking at the 
Vedas with suspicion. Atheist Carvakas considered the Vedas inane and 
meaningless. Yaska describes the criticisms by Kautsa in Nirukta 1.15. 
Kautsa claimed that the Vedas are meaningless, because neither the 
order of words can be changed nor a word can be replaced with another 
word of same meaning. Kautsa also gave the example of the dialogue 
with inanimate objects, and said that this could be composed by 
mentally ill people only. He considered the Vedas meaningless also 
because 

 18



 

several mantras contradict each other, like sometimes one Rudra   
is mentioned and sometimes thousand Rudras are mentioned.  
These criticisms are valid when actual meaning of the Vedas is not 

known. We are indeed fortunate that the Vedas have still come to us as 
intended, and the contribution of the Brahmanas in preserving the 
Vedas can not be underestimated. Brahmanas were supposed to protect 
the Vedas, and they have performed their job very well. Most famous 
commentator of the Vedas is Sayana. His commentary has been the 
basis of western scholars of the Vedas. Uvvata and Mahidhara have 
also written commentaries on the Vedas. Prominent commentators 
among western scholars are Roth and Maxmuller. Among recent 
Indian scholars, the commentaries of Dayananda, Aurobindo and 
Satavalekara are prominent. Dayananda considered the Vedas to be the 
books of all fields of knowledge, and he has written his commentaries 
to prove this point. Aurobindo has given a psychological 
interpretation of the Vedas. Satavalekara follows the line of thinking of 
Dayananda to certain extent. Despite all these attempts, the meaning of 
the Vedas has eluded mankind so far, because none of them have 
shown the existence of an extraordinary knowledge in the Vedas, 
which will justify the honor given to the Vedas since their discovery. 
This book is the first serious attempt in decoding that extra-ordinary 
meaning of the Vedas, and once the reader has finished this book, the 
reader will know the reason for the failure of earlier commentators. 
The physics that the Vedas talk about has not been discovered yet, and 
it is only now that modern physics has given humanity a foundation to 
launch an attempt to understand the Vedas. In fact knowledge of the 
Vedas was targeted for us, for what purpose, I do not know. It is a gift 
to humanity from the ancestors of antiquity, who have been maligned 
as invaders and barbarians, but they had only love for their 
descendents, and the Vedas are the testimony of that love. 
The Vedas have guided Indian civilization for the last five 

 19



 
 

thousand years. The Vedas are the pillars of Hinduism. Hinduism has 
evolved from the Vedas, but the current popular form of Hinduism is 
very different from that in the Vedic period. Most Hindus know about 
Hinduism from popular epics Ramayana and Mahabharata, and from 
Puranas. Hinduism has changed in form so much from the Vedic 
period that modern historians have argued about the Indus Valley 
Civilization being non-Hindu, and educated Hindus have accepted it. 
In fact, there is simply nothing in the Indus Valley Civilization that is 
not part of Hinduism. The people of the Indus Valley Civilization were 
representing the knowledge of the Vedas in various forms. The Vedas 
formed the very basis of that civilization, which the Vedic people are 
accused of destroying. This accusation could gain any ground, because 
the physics of the Vedas was completely forgotten. In this book, we 
will discover the lost physics of the Vedas after thousands of years, 
and start the process of interpretation of the so-far undeciphered Indus 
Valley seals. 

 20



 

"I cannot deny the feeling of unreality in writing about the first 
three minutes as if we really know what we are talking about." 

- Steven Weinberg 
 

2. The Time Before Time 

You are about to set forth on a journey like the one you have never 
taken before. You are about to see things that you have never even 
suspected to exist. You are about to confront the wisdom from 
beyond. Your journey into the fascinating realm of Vedic wisdom 
will take you billions of years in past to a time when even time did 
not exist. 

2.1: The Golden Womb 
 

Imagine yourself going backward in time all the way to the first 
moment, when universe came into existence with the expansion of 
the universe. What was there before this moment of creation? 

 21



 
 

"Before creation there existed golden womb, he was the only lord of 
everything born. He holds earth and this heaven." 

Rgveda 10.121.1 
 
The creation is only a manifestation of the supreme being. Before 

creation the supreme being existed in an unmanifested form. This 
form is called the golden womb, a womb because the whole universe 
originated from it. Why is the womb considered golden? Gold has a 
special color. Materials turn golden at very high temperature. The 
womb from which sun, stars and galaxies are formed, golden is an 
appropriate adjective for that. Gold is thus the color of energy in 
Vedic literature. The association of gods with gold in Hindu Dharma 
is a symbolic representation of gods being various forms of energy. 
The idols of gods have always been adorned by gold for this reason, 
and this is the reason for the excessive attachment of Hindus with 
gold. At one time India was called the golden sparrow, because 
Indians had accumulated vast quantities of gold during thousands of 
years of civilization and it was the richest country in the world. The 
legends of its riches were spread in faraway places, and voyagers were 
so fascinated with India that wherever they landed, they called the 
native inhabitants Indians. The state of being before the creation is 
described with precision in the Nasadiya hymn of the Rgveda. 

 
Rgveda 10.129 

Sage: Prajapati Paramesthi; Deity: Bhavavrtta; Metre: Tristupa 

1. There was neither manifested nor unmanifested. Then there was 
no dust and there was no sky beyond that. What was covering, where 
was whose shelter? What was the deep, inexplicable sound? 
2. There was neither death nor immortality. There was no 
differentiation between night and day. Only he was there by his own 
will without air. There was nothing beyond him. 
3. Earlier there was darkness, everything was enveloped in 

 22



 

darkness. All this was undifferentiated fluid (Salila). Whatever was, 
was covered in emptiness. That one was born from heat. 
4. Earlier (before creation) desire (to create) arose in him, then from 
his mind first seed was born. Wise men by reasoning found the 
manifested bonded to unmanifested. 
5. Its rays spread oblique, down and up. He became the begetter. He 
became great by his own will below and beyond. 
6. Who knows, who will tell here that from where and why this 
creation was born, because gods were born after the moment of 
creation. Therefore, who knows from whom this was born. 
7. From whom this creation was born, he upholds this or not. Its lord 
who resides in the remotest sky, may be he knows or may be even he 
does not. 

 

The state of being before the creation was way beyond we can 
comprehend by senses. There was emptiness, and everything we can 
observe was not there. There was neither space nor time. There was 
neither matter nor energy. This is a very important concept in the Vedic 
cosmology. Modern physics tells us that all the matter and energy of 
the universe was concentrated in a point, while verses one to three 
clearly emphasize that the Vedas consider the universe to be 
completely empty in the beginning. The Taittiriya Brahmana says: 
 

"Earlier there was absolutely nothing. There was no heaven, no 
earth and no atmosphere." Taittiriya Brahmana 2.2.9.1 

 

This has very important consequences for the evolution of the 
universe as we will see. Modern physics tells us that the universe 
started infinitely hot, which cooled down rapidly with the expansion of 
the universe. Vedas tell us the opposite. Universe was extremely cold 
in the beginning. The evolution of the universe started with the rise in 
temperature. In verse three, the cause of the universe is said to be tapa. 
Tapa is a very important concept 

 23



 
 

in Hinduism. In post-Vedic Hinduism, Tapa comes to mean the 
performance of austerity in deep forests, the result of which could be 
the gain of immense power. Tapa means to heat, to warm up, and it is 
in this sense that tapa is used in the Vedas. The evolution of universe 
started with the creation of matter, energy and space, the effect of 
which was to warm up the universe. In this way whole universe could 
be considered to be born out of Tapa. 

2.2: Water Everywhere 

There was complete darkness earlier and all that existed was Salila 
(Rgveda 10.129.3 quoted above). Salila means water, but in the 
Rgveda it is a technical term which means undifferentiated primordial 
fluid. In the verse Salila is preceded by the adjective "apraketa" 
meaning undifferentiated, which leaves no doubt about its intended 
meaning. The Rgveda is a book of ancient cosmology, which uses 
common words known to the Indus Valley people, so that everyone 
could understand the most abstruse concepts. For us, who are far 
removed in time from those people, the Vedas are the only guide to 
understand their way of life. This is not an easy task, because the real 
meaning of the Vedas is very different from the apparent meaning. 
We have to pick up each word, try to decipher its meaning, and then 
see whether it fits in the framework of the Vedas. That "Salila" is a 
technical word in the Vedas is clearly confirmed by a mantra from the 
Satapatha Bralimana. Mantra 11.1.6.1 says that Apah were indeed 
Salila earlier. Now Apah and Salila both mean water. If water is the 
intended meaning then this verse will make no sense at all. Clearly 
both Apah and Salila are technical terms, and can not be used 
interchangeably. We can think of words "speed" and "velocity" which
in the ordinary usage are equivalent, but in Physics their meanings are
very different, one being a scalar quantity and the other a vector. Salila 
is the primordial state of the universe, when there is nothing 

 24



 

manifest. There is complete equilibrium and homogeneity. When this 
equilibrium is broken due to the action of the fundamental forces of 
nature, inhomogeneity is created, and this inhomogeneous state is 
termed Apah. 

The Vedas tell us that in the beginning everything was Salila, 
whose apparent meaning is that there was water everywhere. This 
concept of water being everywhere was spread all over the world and 
was later borrowed by other religions. The Bible (Genesis 1.1 -2 and 
1.6-7) and The Koran (21.30) say that in the beginning the universe 
consisted of water only. A description of the myths of Quiches, the 
native Indians of South America, is found in Popol Vuh. Quiches 
believed that in the beginning there was nothing but water and the 
feathered serpent[1]. The message of the Vedas was spread far and 
away, and Vedic science had given rise to many popular myths. 
 
 
 

2.3: Deluge that Never Came 
 

Another widespread belief of the ancient world is that of a deluge. It is 
really strange that the whole world believed in a deluge, when such a 
deluge had not come during the last ten thousand years. How could 
humans have a memory of a deluge that must have come before ten 
millennia if at all, while the history of civilization is of a more recent 
origin. Only logical answer is that it is part of a popular myth confused 
with reality. The cause of this confusion is the use of words Salila and 
Apah in Vedic science. The Vedas use Salila to denote the primordial 
undifferentiated fluid, the confusion of which with water gave rise to 
the story of watery origins. Apah denotes the inhomogeneous state of 
the universe. Apah also means water, and this water formed the basis  
of deluge stories. The story of deluge is not found in the Vedas. The 
oldest version of deluge is found in the Satapatha Brahmana 1.8.1.1-6. 
One day Manu, son of Vivasvana held a little water in 

 25



 
 

his hand to clean his mouth. A very small fish was caught in his 
hand. The fish said that nourish it and it would protect him. Manu 
asked how the fish would protect him? The fish said that in a few 
days a deluge would destroy everything and it would protect him 
from that. Manu asked how he could protect the fish. The fish said 
that put it in a pot, then in a pit, and then in ocean. The fish told 
Manu the time of the deluge and to be ready with a boat. When the 
flood came, Manu rode in the boat. The fish came to him as a huge 
fish with one horn. Manu tied the boat with a rope to the horn of the 
fish. The fish took him to a mountain, and told to stay there till the 
flood subsided. This story transforms in the incarnation of Lord 
Visnu as a fish in the Puranas. 

  
Myth of such a deluge was prevalent among the tribes of North 

American Indians as well. George Catlin, a nineteenth century 
traveler, who lived among native Indians, tells us about the deluge 
myth among a tribe near west bank of Missouri in USA[2]. Mandans 
believed that the human race was destroyed by the rising of the 
waters. Only one man survived the deluge, who landed his big canoe 
on a high mountain. All human beings have descended from that 
man. Peruvians also believed in a deluge myth[3]. Only one man and 
a woman survived the deluge. They floated in a box to a place 
several hundred miles from Cuzco. They settled there on the order of 
creator. The Bible tells the story of deluge in Genesis 6.1 to 8.22. 
Cosmology of Semitic religions is a direct borrowing from the 
Vedas. 

2.4: Creator 

Verse 10.129.4 tells us that the universe was created by the desire of 
the Supreme being. This is in complete contrast with modern 
physics. Modern science tells us that evolution of the universe is a 
random phenomenon. It does not tell us why an infinitely complex 
structure like human being has evolved, because 

 26



 

randomness can only increase the disorder in the universe. 
Verse 10.129.5 tells that once the process of creation began, 

Supreme being became great, meaning universe started to expand. In 
the Vedas universe is not considered different from Supreme being. 
Expansion of the universe is a key feature of Vedic cosmology and is 
in agreement with modern science, but there are very significant 
differences as well, and the aim of this book is to highlight those 
differences. A common complain against scientific interpretation of 
Hindu scriptures is that why do these interpretations come up only 
after the discovery of scientific facts? Is there anything in the 
scriptures, which can be told before its scientific discovery? In this 
book I am going to do exactly that. At every stage I will highlight the 
differences, and these differences are not minute by any stretch of 
imagination. It is up to the scientists to prove that the Rgveda is wrong. 
If the Rgveda is a product of primitive people engaged in agriculture 
and husbandry, then if should not take even minutes to prove that this 
scientific interpretation is wrong. In fact, a book detailing the science 
of those ancient people can not even be attempted. One can also say 
that this whole science is the product of author, and that it does not 
exist in the Vedas. To refute this claim, I will quote extensively from 
the scriptures, pick up the words from mantras, and dissect those 
words to reveal the meaning behind. Soon it will become clear that we 
are not dealing with primitive minds, but minds who had the capability 
to look inside atoms on one hand, and to observe the boundaries of the 
universe on the other hand. 

Verse 10.129.7 states that the supreme being resides in "Parama 
Vyoma". Vyoma means sky or space, and parama means remotest. 
Thus Supreme being exists beyond our senses of space and time, and 
this is the state about which wise sages talk about during the moments 
of realization of truth. It will seem paradoxical, that on one hand the 
Vedas do not consider Supreme being to the different from the 
universe, and still talk about him 

 27



 
 

as being beyond our senses. This is so because what we normally 
observe is only the manifestation at a gross scale, while the ultimate 
realization of this concept can only occur at a very subtle scale well 
beyond our scientific capabilities. Let's then proceed to see in more 
detail what the Rgveda tells about the supreme being in the most 
important hymn of the Vedas, the Purusa hymn. 

 28



 

"I dwell within all beings as the soul, the pure consciousness, the ground of 
all phenomena, internal and external. I am both the enjoyer and that which is 
enjoyed. In the days of my ignorance, I used to think of these as being 
separate from myself. Now I know that I am all." 

- Sankaracarya 
 

3. All this is Purusa 

The Purusa hymn is considered the most important hymn in the 
Rgveda. The importance of the Purusa hymn is obvious from the fact 
that this is the only hymn available in all four Vedas. Vedavyasa has 
said in Mahabharata, Santi Parva, 338.5 that the Purusa hymn is the 
most important hymn in the Vedas. This is a very important point to 
remember that while Indian tradition considers the Purusa hymn to be 
the most important hymn, western scholarship considers the Purusa 
hymn to represent a savage myth. Western scholarship thus concludes 
that the Purusa hymn is a very old hymn in the Vedas, while the 
Nasadiya hymn, which is very profound, is considered to be of a very 
late origin. We will soon see the absurdity of this viewpoint. 
Remember, India can be understood only from an Indian point of view, 
because 

 29



 
 

it has a unique history. The Purusa hymn is the key to 
understanding the Vedas. In the Rgveda, the Purusa hymn consists 
of 16 verses, in other Vedas it consists of up to 22 verses. 

In the Rgveda, "Purusa" word is used fourteen times, out of 
which nine times it has been used in the Purusa hymn itself. Purusa 
means man, but this is not the intended meaning in the Vedas. To 
understand the meaning of the Vedas, we have to find the 
etymological meaning of each word in the Vedas. Purusa 
etymologically means one who is pervading the town (Pura) or one 
who is sleeping in town. Pura itself means one which guards and 
nourishes. Here it is important to note that Pura is no ordinary town. 
The whole cosmos is considered the town, and the supreme being 
who pervades the cosmos is Purusa. Thus Purusa in the Vedas 
stands for God, and this is the way Purusa has been described in all 
scriptures and commentaries following the Vedas. Satapatha 
Brahmana 7.4.1.15 and Jaiminlya Brahmana 2.47 equate Purusa 
with creator Prajapati. As this is the most important hymn of the 
Vedas, we will follow each verse of the Purusa hymn of the Rgveda 
in order to understand the meaning of the Vedas and the seals 
belonging to the Indus Valley Civilization. 

3.1: The Purusa Hymn 
 
Rgveda 10.90 Sage: 

Narayana; Deity: Purusa; Metre: 
Anustupa, 16 - Tristupa 

 
"Purusa has thousand heads, thousand eyes and thousand legs. 
He is covering Bhumi from all around, and is beyond also in ten- 
finger form." Rgveda 10.90.1 

 
Bhumi means land and here it is used to denote the universe. 

Thousand is used in the sense of infinite. The most crucial point 

 30



 

in this verse is that the Purusa exists outside the universe in ten-    
finger form. The Vedas are full of numbers like three, seven, and ten. A 
careful reading of the Vedas will reveal that these numbers do not occur 
at random as will be the case if the Vedas were a poetry of pastoral 
people. There is a consistency about these numbers. What could ten-
finger form represent? Could it represent ten dimensions? Yaska says 
that directions are hand of nature in Nirukta 1.7. Taittiriya Samhita 
4.7.9.1 says that fingers are directions. The Satapatha Brahmana 
(6.3.1.21 and 8.4.2.13) tells that directions (Disa) are ten. In modern 
scientific terminology direction will mean dimension. Thus we have 
compelling evidence of universe being considered ten-dimensional in 
Vedic cosmology. In the Vedic cosmology the universe has a boundary 
which is obvious from the word "beyond" in this verse. Vayu  Purana 
4.74-75 tells us that the whole universe including moon, sun, galaxies 
and planets was inside the egg and the egg was surrounded by ten 
qualities from outside. Vedic commentator Sayana also considers 
"dasangula" to represent outside of the universe. This verse then tells us 
that outside of the universe is ten-dimensional. "Ten fingers" is not an 
isolated occurrence in the Vedas. Ten fingers extracting the juice of 
Soma is a recurring theme in the Rgveda (for example 9.46.6). It is also 
important to note that the same phenomenon has been described in 
various ways in the Rgveda. The aim is to make sure that important 
messages are not overlooked. So these ten fingers become ten women in 
Rgveda 9.56.3, where it is said that ten women call Soma to come to 
them. The Vedas are the source of many of our beliefs. When Hindus go 
to a foreign land, it is said that they have gone across seven seas. Now 
the number of seas on our earth is not seven. This belief has its origin in 
"Sapta-sindhu" meaning seven rivers or seas of Rgveda. The seven seas 
of the Rgveda have nothing to do with rivers or seas. Similarly Hindus 
still refer to forty nine winds. These forty nine winds have the origin in 
the ferry nine Manilas of the Rgveda, because Maruta 

 31



 
 

means wind. However, Maruta has nothing to do with wind in the 
Rgveda. Hindus have the concept of ten directions. These ten 
directions are described as north, east, south, west, north-east, 
north-west, south-west, south-east, up and down. Obviously the 
counting of north-east, north-west, south-west and south-east as 
separate directions does not make sense at all. This is because the 
concept of ten directions has its origin in ten dimensions of Vedic 
physics, and when this knowledge was lost, Hindu intellectuals 
came up with the above explanation. Post-vedic Indian literature is 
full of such explanations of Vedic knowledge, which do not make 
sense at all. There was little choice left to post-vedic Indian 
intellectuals, as the Vedic verses were becoming hard to 
comprehend. Vedic science was being gradually forgotten, and in 
order to preserve the invaluable Vedic wisdom, some kind of 
explanation was necessary. Brahmanas have done the humanity a 
great service by preserving the Vedas against all odds. Today in the 
light of modern physics we can start the process of deciphering the 
Vedas. 

"All this is Purusa, whatever has happened and whatever will 
happen. He is the lord of immortality, who increases by food." 

Rgveda 10.90.2 
 
This verse is the origin of the Vedantic philosophy. Chandogya 

Upanisad 3.14.1 says that all this is Brahma indeed. As everything 
in the universe is a manifestation of the Purusa, we are also part of 
the supreme being. Hindu scriptures tell that when we realize the 
true nature of self, then there remains no difference between us and 
God. This realization is reflected in Brhadaranyaka Upanisad 
1.4.10, which says that I am Brahma. Purusa is not different from 
the universe. Universe is only a manifestation of him. This is why 
Hindus did not develop a dichotomy between good and evil as in 
other religions. There is no concept of eternal hell in Hinduism, 
because even hell can not be separated from 

 32



 

the God. In fact, there is no concept of hell or heaven after the end of 
universe. Universe is only a manifestation of the supreme being, and 
at the end of present cycle of the universe called "Mahapralaya" 
everything goes back into the Purusa. After the end of the universe, 
there is no heaven, there is no hell, and there are no souls. 

The second part of the verse is very significant. It tells that the 
Purusa is growing by food (Anna). Purusa also means a man. As a boy 
grows by food, the universe is growing by Anna. Obviously, this is no 
ordinary food (Anna). This food is the stuff that the universe is made 
of. Thus "Anna" can be identified by the matter-energy of the 
universe. The expansion of the universe is a key point of the Vedic 
science, and is referred to again and again in the Vedas. 
 

"Such is his glory, there is an even greater Purusa. All that is born, is 
his one fourth, his three fourth is immortal in heaven." 

Rgveda 10.90.3 
 

The division of the universe in the earth and the heaven is the 
central thesis of the Vedic science. One fourth of the universe is in the 
earth and three fourth of the universe is in the heaven. This may look 
very unscientific, because the earth is negligibly small compared to 
the heaven. By no stretch of imagination the earth can hold one fourth 
of the universe. However, I would remind my learned reader that 
knowledge of the Vedas is coded. Nothing in the Vedas means what it 
appears to mean. Once you understand the scientific meaning of the 
earth and the heaven, this verse will reveal a great cosmic secret. The 
meaning of the earth and the heaven will be discussed in detail in a 
later chapter. For those readers, who cannot hold their curiosity, there 
is a glossary at the end of the book, which lists the apparent meaning 
and scientific meaning of important technical terms used in the Vedas. 
I request the reader to frequently consult the glossary, whenever in 
doubt. 

 33



 
 

"Three-fourth of the Purusa is above, his one fourth is born again 
and again. Then he covered them all, those who eat, and those 
who don't." Rgveda 10.90.4 

 
This verse reinforces the ideas of the previous verse, so that 

there is no confusion about its meaning. One fourth of the Purusa is 
in the earth and is born repeatedly, while three fourth of the Purusa 
is in the heaven, where there is neither birth nor death. Earlier food 
(Anna) was identified by matter and energy of the universe, so 
eating refers to the transformation of matter into energy. 
 
"Then Virata was born. Virata is greater Purusa. He began dividing 
after being born. Then Bhumi and Pura became." 

Rgveda 10.90.5 
 
When the universe starts to expand, it is given the name Virata 

meaning extremely big. The expansion of the universe is 
accompanied by its division into the earth and the heaven. Bhumi 
refers to earth and Pura to the boundary of universe. Pura means a 
fortified town and is also used in the sense of fort surrounding the 
town. This concept is a very important one, as this will help 
unravel the meaning of the mightiest Vedic God, Indra, also called 
Purandara meaning one who breaks the fortified towns. 
 
"When Gods started Yajna by oblation of Purusa, spring was its 
butter, summer was fuel and winter was oblation." 

Rgveda 10.90.6 
 
"That Purusa, who was born earlier, was sprinkled by sacrificial 
grass. Gods, Sadhyas and sages started the Yajna by Purusa." 

Rgveda 10.90.7

 34



 
 

     These two verses talk about Yajna, which is normally translated as 
sacrificial ceremony. The Purusa himself was sacrificed in this Yajna. 
Yajna is a very important concept in Hinduism. Yajna refers to the 
creation of matter, energy and space, none of which existed before the 
creation. My knowledgeable readers will object to this statement saying 
that matter and energy have always existed, and all the matter and energy 
of the entire universe was concentrated in a point before the Big Bang. 
This is not the Vedic concept and I will argue in greater detail later in this 
book during the discussion of the Vedic cosmology that the universe did 
not start with a Big Bang. The Vedas are very clear about the universe 
emerging from a void, and this is the basis of saying "Sunya hi 
Paramesvara hai" meaning Void is God indeed. 

As the universe had no matter, energy and space to begin with, the 
creation of these is obviously most important for the universe. As Yajna is 
the creation of the stuff universe is made of, it is no wonder that the Vedic 
sages do not get tired of describing the importance of Yajna. They declare 
that Yajna is the navel of the universe, meaning universe exists because of 
Yajna. Satapatha Brahmana 14.3.2.1 declares that Yajna is the soul of all 
these beings. 
 
 "From that Yajna of entire offering coagulated butter (or butter mixed 

with curd) was obtained. Vayavya, Aranya and Gramya 
animals (Pasu) were made." Rgveda 10.90.8 

 
As Yajna proceeded, that is the creation of the matter, energy 

and space proceeded, the earlier homogeneous state became 
inhomogeneous. This inhomogeneity is represented by coagulated 
butter. The universe was no longer same everywhere. It separated into 
matter and energy. Matter particles were given the name  animals, and 
divided in three categories: Gramya meaning those living in villages, 
Aranya meaning wild animals, and Vayavya meaning birds. 

 35



 
 

"From that Yajna of entire offering Rchas, Samas were born. From 
that metres (Chandas) were born, from that Yaju was born." 

Rgveda 10.90.9 
 
This verse is traditionally quoted to prove the origin of the 

Rgveda, the Samaveda, the Yajurveda, and the Atharvaveda from 
the God. The Atharvaveda is not explicitly mentioned and 
commonly Chanda is identified with the Atharvaveda to prove the 
divine origin of the Atharvaveda. Of all four Vedas, the Rgveda is 
considered the most sacred, and even other Vedas get their 
recognition of being divine by this verse in the Rgveda itself. 
 
"From that horses were born, who have teeth on both sides. From 
that cows were born, from that goats and sheeps were born." 

Rgveda 10.90.10 
 
This verse sheds more light on Gramya animals described 

earlier. Four Gramya animals are listed here: horse, cow, goat and 
sheep. Vayavya and Aranya animals are not listed. 
 
"The Purusa described here, how many ways has he been 
imagined? What (is) his mouth, what (are) both hands, what are 
called thighs and both legs?" Rgveda 10.90.11 
 
"Brahmana was his mouth, Rajanya was made hands, his thighs 
(are) those that (are) Vaisya, for both legs Sudra is born." 

Rgveda 10.90.12 
 
"From his mind moon was born, from his eyes sun was born. 
From his mouth Indra and fire (Agni) were born. From life-breath 
air (Vayu) was born." Rgveda 10.90.I3 

 36



 

"Atmosphere was from navel, from head came heaven. From both
legs land, from ears directions (came), similarly worlds are
imagined." Rgveda 10.90.14 

 

These four verses are figurative, and describe the society and 
cosmos as various parts of the supreme being. The idea of the God as a 
human being is described in a poetic way in these verses. These verses 
form the basis of the idea of the God making man in his own image in 
Semitic religions. 
 

"Seven were its enclosures (Paridhi), three times seven were made 
firelogs (Samidha). In the Yajna, which gods were expanding, 
they sacrificed the Purusa-animal." Rgveda 10.90.15 

 

This verse can be considered the key to understanding the Vedas. It 
contains the sacred numbers three and seven, both of which are 
encountered again and again in the Vedas. Three refers to the three 
Lokas, earth (Prthivi), atmosphere (Antariksa) and Heaven (Dyau). 
Each loka contains seven firelogs making the total twenty one. 

What does the sacrifice of Purusa-animal mean? How can the God 
himself be sacrificed? The sacrifice here means a change of form, a 
change from unmanifested form to a form of manifested universe. This 
change of form is described in a verse in the Atharvaveda: 
 

"Earlier he had no legs, he gave rise to Svah. He then became four-
legged and consumable, later he ate all the food." 

Atharvaveda 10.8.21 
 
 
When the Purusa is formless, he has no legs, when he takes form, 

he becomes legged. The consumption here represents the annihilation 
of particles into energy. At the end of the universe neither matter nor 
energy exists, which is represented as Purusa 

 37



 
 

having eaten all the food. As the Purusa ceased to be what the 
Purusa was before the creation, he was symbolically sacrificed. 
This had nothing to do with human sacrifice. 
 
"Gods started the Yajna from Yajiia, those were the first Dharmas. 
Those glorious ones attain heaven, where earlier celestial beings 
and gods are." Rgveda 10.90.16 

 
Once the process of creation has started, it continued by itself. 

Vedic sages were worshippers of knowledge. They wanted their 
descendents to continue that tradition. Therefore they promised 
union with gods for those, who knew the process of creation. 

3.2: Man in the Image of God 
 
As the Purusa hymn is the most important hymn in the Rgveda, and 
the Rgveda was considered the most sacred knowledge by the 
inhabitants of the Indus Valley Civilization, it is natural to expect 
that the knowledge of the Purusa hymn would be reflected in their 
culture. Figure 3.1 shows the human figurine found at Mohenjo-
daro in the Indus Valley. This has been called priest-king by 
Marshall, which is pure speculation. I will identify this with Purusa. 
First, this figure is indeed of a man, and Purusa means man. 
Second, the man is shown wearing a garment with three intersecting 
circles. These three intersecting circles represent the intertwined 
three lokas (spaces) resulting from the two-fold division. The 
division of the universe in three spaces is discussed in detail in the 
sixth chapter. Vedic ideas were spread all over the world during the 
dawn of human civilization. Later the origin of these ideas was 
forgotten, but the ideas were incorporated in the religions that came 
later. Depiction of God as man (Purusa) in Rgveda is the basis of 
the belief in Semitic religions that man has been created in the 
image of God (The Bible, Genesis U7) 

 38



 
 

Figure 3.1: Purusa, a statue from Mohenjo-daro (DK 1909) 

 39



 
 

3.3: Secret of the Unicorn 

One of the most puzzling aspect of the Indus Valley Civilization is 
the depiction of unicorn on the seals. There is no animal in the 
world that resembles the unicorn. Some historians have tried to 
explain it as a representation of rhinoceros, but there is no similarity 
at all between a rhinoceros and the unicorn of the Indus Valley 
Civilization. Figure 3.2 shows the famous unicorn motif of the 
Indus Valley Civilization. This is the motif of more than half of the 
seals found, so this is the central point of the belief of the Indus 
people. This also happens to be the representation of the fifteenth 
verse of the Purusa hymn. The figure shows the sacrifice of the 
Purusa animal. In the verse Purusa is described as an animal, and so 
the seals represent the Purusa as an animal. But the Purusa is no 
ordinary animal, he is one lord of the whole universe. This oneness 
is represented by the one horn of the animal. A unicorn was also 
chosen to make the clear distinction that it does not represent an 
actual animal sacrifice, but is a symbolic one. The object in front of 
the unicorn is described in literature either as a mysterious object or 
a melange. It can not be a melange as the mouth of the unicorn is 
almost always facing away from the object. This object represents a 
Vadhyasila, a sacrificing stone on which the neck of sacrificed 
animal is put for slaughtering. The animal will obviously in such a
situation look away from the stone. In some seals with this motif 
even few drops are visible, which would represent the blood coming 
out of sacrifice. The most important fact is that there is a direct 
correlation between the importance of the Purusa in the Vedas and 
the frequency of occurrence of the seals with the unicorn motif. 

The Purusa hymn is the most important hymn of the Vedas as 
attested by its occurrence in all four Vedas and description of its 
importance in post-vedic scriptures. That there is only one hymn 
dedicated to the Purusa in the Rgveda does not lessen the 

 40



 
 

Figure 3.2: Sacrifice of Purusa Animal, an 
Indus seal from Harappa (H-9)

 41



 
 

importance of the Purusa, because in the Rgveda all numbers are 
carefully selected. There is only one hymn dedicated to the Purusa 
because there is only one Purusa. The unicorn motif is the most 
frequently depicted motif on the Indus seals, because it represents the 
sacrifice of the Purusa animal. This at once proves that the Indus 
Valley Civilization was Vedic Civilization. 

3.4: Purusa Sacrifice 
 
As the Purusa hymn is the most important hymn of the Vedas, and 
knowledge of the Vedas was spread all over the world by ancient 
Indians, it is only to be expected that the myths related to the Purusa 
sacrifice would be found all round the globe. In Egypt, corpse of 
Osiris was torn in fourteen pieces and scattered all over. Various 
natural objects formed from these pieces. In Greek mythology, 
Dionysus Zagreus was chopped into pieces by titans. In the Norse 
myths, giant Ymir is torn into pieces. Earth forms from his flesh, sea 
and waters from his blood, mountains from his bones, rocks from his 
teeth, plants from his hair, sky from his head and clouds from his 
brain. Among Chaldeans, Omorca is cut in two pieces and two halves 
of her body become heaven and earth. 

Among the Tinnehs, native Indian tribes of Canada, a giant tears 
apart a handsome young man. From the fragments thrown into the 
rivers fishes were born and from the fragments thrown into air birds 
were born[l]. Among Iroquois of North America, limbs, bones and 
blood of giant Chokanipok form natural objects. 
 
 
 
3.5: The Concept of Paradise 

Paradise is formed from the word Pairy-Diz meaning enclosure in the 
Avesta, an Iranian scripture having close resemblance to 

 42



 

the Vedas. Pairy-Diz in turn is the deformation of Paridhi and has 
same meaning. As in the Purusa hymn, Pairy-Diz is also seven in 
die Avesta. This has given rise to the concept of seven tiers in the 
heaven. The Koran talks of seven heavens in 2.29,67.3 and 71 15 
 

 

3.6: Prajapati 
 

In the age of Brahmanas concept of the Purusa was replaced by that of the 
Prajapati. The Satapatha Brahmana says: 
 

Apah were indeed Salila earlier. Desire arose in it. They labored. 
From that heat arose. From heat golden egg was born. Golden 
egg was swimming in that for a year. After that year Purusa was 
born. He is Prajapati." Satapatha Brahmana 11.1.6.1-2 

 

In this mantra the Purusa is equated with the Prajapati. In 
   post-vedic scriptures the Prajapati is the creator of the universe. 

We also see an important difference. The Purusa is shown as being 
born after the creation of the golden egg, which is clearly against what 
we have seen earlier in the Rgveda. The Satapatha Brahmana is 
invaluable in our quest to find the meaning of the Vedas, but at the 
same time we have to be very careful in our attempt, because there is a 
clear sign of the loss of the Vedic science. The Brahmanas are very 
clear about this themselves. After the Mahabharata war, the Vedas 
started to become incomprehensible due to the loss of the Vedic 
knowledge base. The Sages feared that soon the Vedas will become 
completely incomprehensible, and therefore they started to write the 
Brahmanas, the commentaries on the Vedas. As such the Brahmanas 
represent a significant deviation from the Vedas, and several centuries 
must have passed between the Mahabharata war and the writing of the 
Brahmanas. 

 43



 
 

In the Satapatha Brahmana, the Prajapati wants to cohabit with his 
daughter. She feels outraged and becomes a cow. The Prajapati 
becomes a bull and cohabits with her. She keeps changing in to 
various animals, and the Prajapati also keeps changing in to 
corresponding male animals. Thus various animals are born due to 
their cohabitation. There is a parallel Greek legend to this, in which 
Zeus takes the form of various animals. Persephone takes the form of 
a serpent and Zeus becomes a male dragon to cohabit with her. 
Similarly, Zeus took various animal forms of swan, eagle and dove in 
his amorous adventures. To woo the daughter of Cletor he became an 
ant. As these adventures are not found in Vedas, it stands to reason 
that the Greeks did not borrow these ideas from the Vedas, but from 
the Brahmanas. This is only logical, because the Indus Valley 
Civilization is the Vedic civilization and predates Greek civilization 
by two millennia. The Greek civilization came into existence after the 
writing of the major Brahmanas. 

The Purusa hymn is the most important hymn of the Vedas, and 
the key to understanding the Vedic cosmology and the Indus Valley 
Civilization, therefore we will keep returning to the Purusa hymn 
throughout this book to unlock the secrets of universe. 

 44



 
 

 

"Ptolemy created a universe that lasted a thousand years. Copernicus created 
a   universe that lasted four hundred years. Einstein has created a universe, and I                  
can't tell you how long it will last." 

     - George Bernard Shaw 
 

 
  4. The Expanding Egg 
'  

 
Sanskrit is a beautiful language. Each word in Sanskrit tells its 

meaning itself. Each word has been thought carefully. Sanskrit is not a 
product of evolution from an earlier language. It has been designed to 
be what it is. When Vedic sages coded the knowledge of particle 
physics and cosmology, they were well aware of the possibility that one 
day the code may be lost due to the decline of their civilization. 
Therefore they chose the words very carefully to provide vital clues 
about the code. In this book we will dissect each word, go to its roots, 
and discover the lost Vedic science. 

 
 
 

4.1: The Expanding Universe 
 

The word for universe in Sanskrit is "Brahmanda", which is made 
by joining of words "Brahma" and "Anda". Brahma is derived 

 45



 
 

from root "Brha" meaning to expand and "Anda" means egg. Thus 
"Brahmanda" means expanding egg. Concept of the universe as an 
egg is found in nearly all ancient civilizations, the source of which 
is obviously the Rgveda. The concept of Martanda discussed later in 
this chapter is related to the egg-shaped universe. The universe is 
described as an egg in most post-vedic scriptures. 
 
"Apah were indeed Salila earlier. Desire arose in it. They labored. 
From that heat arose. From heat golden egg was born. Golden egg 
was swimming in that for a year. 

Satapatha Brahmana 11.1.6.1 
 
"Whole universe including moon, sun, galaxies and planets was 
inside the egg. Egg was surrounded by ten qualities from outside." 

Vayu Purana 4.72-73 
 
"At the end of thousand years Egg was divided in two by Vayu." 

Vayu Purana 24.73 
 
"From that golden egg earth and heaven were made." 

Manusmrti 1.13 
 
In Matsya Purana 2.25-30 following story is told about creation. 

After Mahapralaya, dissolution of the universe, there was darkness 
everywhere. Everything was like in a state of sleep. There was 
nothing, either moving or unmoving. Then Svayambhu, self-being, 
manifested, which is the form beyond senses. He created water first 
and established the seed of creation into it. That seed turned into a 
golden egg. Then Svayambhu entered in the egg, and he is called 
Visnu because of entering. The concept of the universe as an egg is 
based on sound scientific reasoning. We will discuss the scientific 
basis of this shape later in this book during the discussion of Vedic 
cosmology. 

 46



 

4.2: Birth of Gods 

What happened during the initial moments of creation? The Big 
Bang cosmology gives a very dramatic account of first few 

moments. The universe was extremely hot and it went through a 
very rapid expansion stage initially called inflation. The Vedic 
viewpoint differs from this view. The initial moments of creation 
are described in the following hymn from the Rgveda: 

 
Rgveda 10.72 

Sage: Laukya Brhaspati or Brhaspati Angirasa or Daksayani Aditi; 
Deity: Gods; Metre: Anustupa 

1. We speak about the birth of Gods clearly. Who says the praises, 
will see them in later ages. 
2. Brahmanaspati created these (everything in the universe) like an 
artisan. In the earlier age of gods manifest was born from 
unmanifest. 
3. In the first age of gods, manifest was born from unmanifest. 
Then quarters of the heaven (Asa) were born, after that one whose 
legs are extended. 
4. From the one whose legs are extended, was born Bhu, and from 
Bhu were bom quarters of the heaven (Asa). From Aditi Daksa was 
born, and from Daksa Aditi was born. 
5. Daksa, your daughter Aditi gave birth. Gracious, immortal 
bonded gods were bom from her. 
6. When gods were sitting in this Salila firmly established, from 
their dance penetrating dust came up. 
7. When gods pervaded whole universe, then in ocean sun was 
brought near. 
8. Those eight sons bom to Aditi, with seven she went to gods, 
and left Martanda away. 
9. With seven sons Aditi went to earlier age. For the birth and 
death of people* (she) accepted Martanda again. 

 47



 
 

4.3: The Dead Egg 
 
The last two verses tell us about Martanda, and here lies the seed of a 
gigantic misconception that man was created in the beginning of the 
universe. Martanda means dead egg. Egg is the universe itself, so dead 
egg means a universe that had no life. The formation of the universe 
was not a spontaneous process. The universe had to expand in order 
to exist, but forces of expansion and contraction were in a delicate 
balance in the beginning. The universe did not keep on expanding 
continuously is the Vedic viewpoint. After an initial expansion, the 
universe started to contract. This is the meaning of Aditi going to 
earlier age. In the Satapatha Brahmana there is an interesting story 
about Martanda. 
 
"Aditi had eight sons. Only seven out of them were called Adityas. 
Eighth Martanda did not have differentiated organs. Adityas saw 
that he did not match with them, so they divided his organs. Then 
he turned into a man. He was named Vivasvana and all people 
were born from him." Satapatha Brahmana 3.1.3.3-4 
 
Taittiriya Samhita 6.5.6.1 says that Aditi gave birth to an immature 
egg. In Mahabharata, Harivamsa Parva 9.5, Kasyapa says to Aditi 
due to ignorance that her son is not dead, but he is inside the egg. 
Therefore he is called Martanda. The gist of all these stories is that 
fundamental forces of nature were not fine tuned for the creation of 
the universe. After an initial expansion the universe started to 
collapse. Then the strengths of fundamental forces were adjusted, and 
the universe began to expand again. Once the universe became 
steady, it was named Vivasvana, where one could live. Satapatha 
Brahmana 3.1.3.4 is the source of the myths that man was created in 
the beginning by God. It is important to note that Vivasvana is the 
universe and he could not possibly give birth to human beings. In 
Rgveda 10.17.1 Yama has been called son of Vivasvana, and in 
Rgveda 10.14.1 Yama has been called 

 48



 

Vaivasvata meaning son of Vivasvana. The sage of hymns 8.27-31 in 
the Rgveda is Vaivasvata Manu. Vaivasvata means son of Vivasvana. 
In Indian scriptures Vivasvana is father of Manu, first king, and in 
Iranian scripture Vivangahvanta (i.e. Vivasvana) is father of Yima (i.e. 
Yama), also the first king. Once the creation of human beings was 
accepted  soon after the creation of the universe in post-vedic 
literature, the Vedas were assumed to be delivered to human beings in 
the beginning. Though the knowledge contained in the Vedas is 
eternal, the Vedas were discovered by the sages of the Indus-SarasvatI 
civilization. The universe is billions of years old, and history of human 
civilization is only 10,000 years old. Before 10,000 years ago human 
mind was not developed enough to comprehend the knowledge 
contained in the Vedas. Human history, and obviously history of  India 
as well, is only 10,000 years old, and the concept of Indian %   history 
being millions of years old as described in the Puranas is wrong 
resulting from the confusion of the Vedic cosmology and human 
history. There is indeed human history in the Puranas, but that starts 
only when the Puranas stop describing the Vedic science as human 
history. This fact was indeed obvious to the authors of the Puranas. 
Vedic concepts are very abstruse, and such abstruse concepts can not 
keep ordinary people interested in Dharma, therefore the Puranas 
deliberately gave beautiful representations to these concepts. To 
ordinary Hindus they are spellbinding stories, but behind these stories 
is hard-core science, which educated Hindu is supposed to know. 
Unfortunately, long time back all Hindus forgot the science behind it, 
and then Hindus could no longer defend their Dharma from the 
onslaught of Christianity and Islam. The source of several ideas found 
in Christianity and Islam are Hindu scriptures, which have been 
borrowed without having the slightest idea about the real scientific 
meaning. In ancient and medieval world Hindus (including Buddhists) 
had spread their ideas far and wide. Consider the following expression 
from the Taittiriya Brahmana. 

 49



 
 

"After creating the universe and people, Prajapati went to sleep." 
Taittiriya Brahmana 1.2.6.1 

 
Similar expression is also found in the Bible (Genesis 2.2), 

which says that God rested on seventh day after finishing all the 
work.. 

4.4: The Lord of Expansion 
 
Verse 10.72.2 tells that Brahmanaspati created the universe like an 
artisan. Brahmanaspati means the Lord of expansion. Thus 
Brahmanaspati can be identified with the expansion of the 
universe, and this mantra tells that universe was created due to 
expansion. Another God in the Rgveda, who is used 
interchangeably with Brahmanaspati is Brhaspati, and the meaning 
of Brhaspati is also the same. Brhaspati in post-vedic scriptures 
becomes the priest of the gods. Word Brhaspati has been used 128 
times in the Rgveda and the word Brahmanaspati 49 times. Eleven 
complete hymns are dedicated to Brhaspati (1.40,1.190, 2.23, 2.24, 
2.25, 2.26, 4.50, 6.73, 10.38, 10.67 and 10.182) and in two other 
hymns (4.49 and 7.97) he has been praised along with Indra. 
Rgveda 2.24 describes the glorious deeds of Brahmanaspati. 

 
Rgveda 2.24 

Sage: Grtsamada Bhargava Saunaka; Deity: Brahmanaspati, 
Metre: Jagati, 12,16 - Tristupa 

1. Brhaspati, who rules the world, may he obtain our praises. We 
praise you by new great speeches, and your friend among us who 
praises you, may he refine our thoughts. 
2. Brahmanaspati, who bent the bendable by his strength, who 
tore apart Sambaras in fury, who shook the unshakable, entered 

 50



 

 the Vasumanta mountain. 
3. That is the work of the best god among the gods, that firm became 

pliant, hard became soft. He brought cows out, killed Bala by 
Brahma, hid the darkness and lighted the heaven. 

4. The well with mouth of stone and stream of honey which 
Brahmanaspati broke by his strength, that was drunk by sun's rays. 
He watered the streams a lot at once.  

5. He opened the door of waters, that have existed and that will form 
later, by months and years. The deeds that Brahmanaspati performed, 
one and the other use the waters effortlessly. 

6. Searching on every side they discovered the remotest wealth  
    hidden by Panis. Those wise ones after seeing the untruth, to 
     enter it, went back to the place they had come from. 
7. Truthful wise ones saw the untruth and stood on the great  
    path again. They left Agni produced by their arms in the mountain, 
    who was not there before. 
8. Brahmanaspati uses bow with truth as string, wherever he wants, he             

pervades. Strings drawn to his ear he throws the successful arrows to 
see the men. 

9. He organizes well, he leads well, he is well praised, he priest    
Brahmanaspati fights well. When all-seeing holds strength and  
wealth, then sun heats up without effort. 

10. All these first to be known riches, which both kinds of people enjoy, 
belong to rain-producing Brahmanaspati, who provides vast 
capabilities. 

11. All pervading Brahmanaspati shows his greatness even in 
     smaller fights. The god expands far bigger than other gods, and 

envelops them from all side. 
12. Wealthy Indra and Brahmanaspati, laws of both of you always 

hold, even waters can not violate your laws. Come straight               
towards our oblation and food like two horses connected to the    
chariot. 

13. Fast moving horses hear, civilized wise people hold the wealth. 
May the strong, who is hostile to enemies, pay back our debt. He, 

     Brahmanaspati, is vigorous in hostile encounters. 

 51



 
 

14. Fury of Brahmanaspati, performer of great deeds, became 
true as he wished. He brought the cows out, divided them by 
great procedure for heaven, and they started moving separately 
by his power. 

15. Brahmanaspati, let us be the master of all well regulated food 
and wealth, our braves procreate braves. O lord of all, may you 
hear our hymns. 

16. Controller Brahmanaspati, may you know this hymn. Nourish 
our children. Whom gods protect, he is very fortunate. We 
having 
brave children will speak the great knowledge. 
 
Verse two tells that Brahmanaspati entered Vasumanta 

mountain. There is no mountain by this name. In the Rgveda 
surface of the universe is called the mountain. Expansion of the 
universe is not spontaneous, and the energy barrier is represented 
by mountain. Vasumanta means containing wealth, and thus this 
mountain is considered to have wealth hidden in it. This wealth is 
the matter and energy of the universe, which will manifest once the 
surface of the universe is pushed further back. In verse five 
Brahmanaspati is said to have opened the gates of waters. This is 
not ordinary water. The scientific meaning of these terms will 
become clear as we go along. In verse five Brahmanaspati is said to 
fight well. This fight is between the forces of expansion and 
contraction, and not between Aryans and Dravidians. In verse 
fourteen Brahmanaspati is said to free cows. Cows are often 
described in the Rgveda to be hidden in mountains, which are freed 
by Brahmanaspati. 
 
"Cows hidden below were freed by two doors and cows above 
by one door." Rgveda 10.67.4 
 
"When Brhaspati found the place where cows were hidden and
making sound, cows came out of mountain like birds come out of 
egg " Rgveda 10.68.7 

 52



 

These cows are fundamental particles of nature, which are yet to 
manifest. In Rgveda 4.50.1 Brhaspati is called Trisadhastha, i.e. staying 
in three places. These three places are earth, atmosphere and heaven. In
Rgveda 4.50.4 Brhaspati is called firstborn and having seven mouth. 
These seven mouths are seven dimensions of earth, atmosphere and 
heaven. We will take up the discussion of these dimensions later. 

4.5: Purusa and Aditi 
 

Most of the verses in Vedas are mysterious. This is so because we don't 
know the actual scientific meaning of these verses. My aim in 
furnishing complete hymns is to give my learned readers as much 
information as possible, so that they can help in finding the lost Vedic 
science. One of these cosmic mysteries is of Aditi and Daksa giving 
birth to each other. This is impossible if they are considered human 
beings. Aditi is called the mother of gods. In post-vedic scriptures 
Purusa and Aditi form a pair and become Visnu-Laksmi or Siva-Sakti. 
In Siva Purana, Daksa performs penance so that supreme mother 
Goddess Sakti could take human birth as his daughter Sati. This is only 
a representation of Aditi and Daksa giving birth to each other. Thus the 
Puranas did an excellent job of bringing abstruse Vedic concepts in an 
interesting style to the ordinary Hindus, and succeeded in preserving the 
invaluable Vedic wisdom for thousands of years. The Vedas are books 
of science, which are fully capable of keeping people mesmerized by 
the knowledge they contain, but once the means to disseminate the 
scientific knowledge were lost, people started questioning the authority 
of the Vedas. In the changed circumstances, the Puranas came to the 
rescue of Hinduism. The wise sages transformed the Vedic science in 
captivating stories to keep the ordinary Hindu interested in Dharma. 
Behind these stories there are all kinds of scientific information. Let's 
then go 

 53



 
 

through a beautiful story of sage Agastya and his wife Lopamudra 
and see what is the science behind. 
 
 
 
4.6: Agastya and Lopamudra 
 
Agastya is a very famous Vedic sage. He is credited with spreading 
of Aryan culture in south India. He is also supposed to be the author 
of first Tamil grammar. Agastya is derived from word Aga, which is 
formed by adding prefix "a" meaning negation to root "ga" meaning 
to go. Thus Agastya means one who does not move, i.e. remains 
fixed. Wife of sage Agastya is Lopamudra. Lopa means 
disappearance and mudra means wealth, thus Lopamudra means 
disappeared wealth. Names in the Rgveda are not proper names, but 
they have a scientific meaning, which can be understood from its 
etymological meaning. The Rgveda is not about historical people, 
but it tells the story of the evolution of the universe by personifying 
scientific phenomena. In Vedic cosmology the universe has a center, 
and matter and energy is continuously being created at the surface of 
the universe as universe expands. Looking backward in time the 
universe had no matter, energy and space at time zero. There is a 
beautiful dialogue between Agastya and Lopamudra in the first book 
of the Rgveda, which explains the story of creation. 

 
Rgveda 1.179 

Sage: 1,2 - Lopamudra, 3,4 - Maitravaruni Agastya, 5,6 -
disciple; Deity : Rati; Metre: Tristupa, 5 - Brhati 

 
1. Lopamudra: I have been practicing self-restraint for several 
winters, getting old by the passage of days, nights and dawns. Old 
age takes away the beauty of body. Vigorous should go near his 
wife (before that happens). 

 54



 

2. Lopamudra: Those truth-speaking people of past, who spoke truth 
with gods, could not find the end of restraint. Wife met the mighty 
husband. 
3. Agastya: Our labor has not gone waste, because gods protect us. 
We have defeated all our enemies. Let's win the match of hundred 
tricks here. Let's meet like couple and produce children. 
4. Agastya: Like a restrained river, desire has come to me from here, 
there and somewhere. Lopamudra is mating with strong husband, 
fickle-minded is enjoying the composed taking long breaths. 
5. Disciple: I pray to Soma, who is near and in my heart. If we have 
sinned, then he forgive us, because mortals have many desires. 
6. Disciple: Agastya excavated with spade desirous of children, 
descendents and strength. Fierce sage nourished the people of both 
color, and obtained true blessings among gods. 

 

This dialogue is the representation of early universe devoid of 
matter, energy and space. Lopamudra represents the state of vanished 
matter and energy and Agastya represents the fixed center of the 
universe. The first verse tells that the expansion of the universe was 
not very rapid as in inflationary Big Bang model. Instead there was a 
long incubation period before the expansion could become steady. It 
also says that universe was cold in the beginning as opposed to the 
infinitely hot universe of Big Bang model. The third verse tells us that 
the battle between forces of expansion and contraction has finally been 
decided in the favor of expansion, and the process of the production of 
matter and energy is about to begin. Last two verses are told by a 
disciple of Agastya, who overheard the conversation between Agastya 
and Lopamudra. In verse five Soma is considered near and inside. I 
will take up a detailed discussion of Soma later in the book. 
Forgiveness is asked from Soma, as Soma could have an adverse 
effect on creation. Sixth verse relates excavation with creation. 

 55



 
 

This excavation is the breaking up of mountains. The surface of the 
universe is represented as mountains, and the expansion of the 
universe is the excavation that results in the production of the 
children, i.e. matter and energy. Most importantly, the second half of 
the verse refers to the production of children of two colors. What 
could be these two colors? Black and white, of course. These two 
colors represent matter and anti-matter. This disproves the myth of 
Aryan invasion, the myth of Aryans of fair complexion overpowering 
the dark-skinned Dravidians. In the Rgveda matter is represented as 
white and anti-matter is represented as black, the colors white and 
black were chosen to represent the opposite nature of matter and anti-
matter. Rgveda talks about the destruction of black-skinned people, 
but it is not about people, it is about annihilation of anti-matter. Our 
universe is matter-dominated and this could not have happened 
without the annihilation of anti-matter. 

Now that you know the Vedic viewpoint that the expansion of the 
universe was not spontaneous, you must be wondering what caused 
the expansion? What are the forces that create expansion and what 
are the forces that oppose it? The battle between the forces of 
expansion and contraction is an epic battle in the Rgveda, 
immortalized in the battle between Indra and Vrtra, and the scene of 
this battle is the edge of the universe. 

 56



 

"For I can end as I began. From our home on earth we look out into the 
distances and strive to imagine the sort of world into which we are bom. 
Today we have reached far out into space. Our immediate neighborhood we 
know intimately. But with increasing distance our knowledge fades, until at 
the last dim horizon, we search among ghostly errors of observations for 
landmarks that are scarcely more substantial. The search will continue. The 
urge is older man history. It is not satisfied and it will not be suppressed." 

- Edwin Hubble 
 

5. Edge of the Universe 

You have already seen that the universe has the shape of an egg, and 
there is a boundary of the universe, and outside of the universe is ten-
dimensional according to the Vedas. In contrast to the Vedic 
cosmology, the universe has no boundary in the Big Bang cosmology. 
The boundary of the universe is the scene of a fierce battle between 
forces of expansion and contraction in the Vedic Cosmology. When 
this physics was forgotten, this battle became a battle between good 
and evil, between gods and demons, between God and Satan. 

 57



 
 

5.1: Indra and Vrtra 
 
The main force of expansion in the Vedic cosmology is Indra, and 
his chief adversary, the main force of contraction, is Vrtra. Indra is 
often referred to as Purandara meaning one who breaks fortified 
towns (Pura). Pura is no ordinary town, but the entire universe, that 
is why the life principle of the universe has been named Purusa. 
Thus Purandara means one who breaks the universe apart. Vrtra 
means one who covers, and is derived from the root "Vr" to cover. If 
Indra is the one who breaks the universe apart, then his chief 
adversary Vrtra must be the one who covers the whole universe. The 
Taittiriya Samhita says that precisely. 
 
"Vrtra covered all three lokas."      Taittiriya Samhita 2.4.12.2 

 
Three lokas constitute the universe, and therefore Vrtra was 

covering the entire universe. If Vrtra is located at the edge of 
universe, then he can be said to be located very far away. One verse 
in the Rgveda attests to this. 
 
"Vrtra was far above in Antariksa." Rgveda 2.30.3 

 
The battle between Indra and Vrtra has been described again and 

again in the Rgveda as this is the central point of the Vedic 
cosmology. Let's then go through a Vedic hymn that describes this 
extraordinary battle in detail. 

 
Rgveda 1.32 

Sage: Hiranyastupa Angirasa; Deity: Indra; Metre: Tristupa 

1. Now I describe the glorious deeds of Indra, who holds Vajra. 
He killed the serpent and made waters flow. He broke the hearts of 
mountains. 
2. He killed the serpent, which was taking refuge in mountain. 

 58



 

Tvasta made the Vajra for him. Like the cows making sounds, flowing 
waters reached the sea. 
3. Mighty Indra chose Soma, and drank from three containers. Generous 
Indra held Vajra in his hand, and killed first bom among the serpents. 
4. O Indra, when you killed first born among the serpents, you also made 
the deception of deceivers ineffective. Then you created dawn and sun in 
heaven, afterwards you could not find any enemy. 
5. Indra severed and killed the great coverer Vrtra by mighty devastating 
Vajra. Like a trunk of a tree cut down by axe, serpent was lying on earth. 
6. Unlike a good warrior, arrogant engaged the mighty warrior, expeller 
of enemies, who can subdue several opponents. Enemy of Indra could not 
withstand the devastating blows of Indra, and broke into several pieces at 
once. 
7. Without leg and without hand, Vrtra fought Indra. Indra hit him by 
Vajra on his head. Like a weakling fighting a mighty warrior, Vrtra was 
lying scattered at several places. 
8. Like the river overflowing its banks, waters started to flow recklessly 
over lying Vrtra. Whom Vrtra was holding by his great extent, the serpent 
was trampled under their feet. 
9. Mother of Vrtra became weak. Indra attacked below her. Then mother 
was on top and son was below. Like a cow over her calf, Danu was lying. 
10. Body was lying among the water-streams, which never stop and never 
rest. Waters were flowing over the hidden Vrtra. The enemy of Indra was 
lying in deep darkness. 
11. Wife of Dasa and protected by serpent, waters were held back lite 
cows by Pani. The gate holding waters was closed, Indra killed Vrtra and 
opened them. 
IX When Vrtra counterattacked, one god Indra became the hair of horse. 
Mighty Indra won the cows, won Soma, and freed seven rivers to flow. 
13. Neither lightening, nor thunder were successful for him. 

 59



 
 

Neither fog nor hail was successful. When Indra and serpent fought, 
generous Indra won for coming years. 
14. O Indra, which follower of serpent did you see that fear entered 
the heart of slayer of Vrtra? You crossed nine and ninety streams 
like a terrified eagle. 
15. Indra, who holds Vajra in his hand, is the king of moving and 
stationary, of peaceful and horned animals. He is the king of men. 
He is enveloping like the felly of wheel surrounds spokes. 

 
It is clear from these verses that Vrtra is same as the serpent. 

The serpent was holding the waters, which was freed when the 
serpent Vrtra was slain. Vrtra was not holding an ordinary amount 
of water. Verse 12 tells us that the slaying of Vrtra resulted in 
freeing seven rivers to flow. Freeing of seven rivers by Indra in this 
verse is not an isolated example, but is repeated several times in the 
Rgveda. The Vedic idea of a serpent holding all the waters is found 
in different myths all over the world. 

5.2: Frog who Drank all the Waters 
 
The myth of a frog that drank all the waters is found among North
American Indian tribe Algonkins, Australian Indians and Andaman 
Islanders[l]. The Algonkins myth relates to the story of a man named 
Ioskeha. The earth was earlier arid and sterile. Ioskeha killed the 
gigantic frog that had swallowed all the waters. The waters were 
released and Ioskeha guided the waters in to smooth streams and 
lakes. According to the Australian myth, a huge frog was holding all 
the waters, and there was no water available anywhere on the earth. 
The frog was made to laugh and waters ran out of its mouth. In the 
myth of the Andaman Islanders, a toad drank up all the waters, and 
there was a drought. When the toad started to dance, the waters 
gushed out of its mouth. The source of all these myths is the 
legendary battle of Indra with 

 60



 
 

Vrtra. As the myth spread, the serpent turned into a frog, but the 
basic idea of a serpent holding all the waters remained the same. 
 

5.3: Electric Force 
 

Having realized that the battle between Indra and Vrtra is the battle 
between the forces of expansion and contraction, it is now time to 
pinpoint which forces are represented by Indra and Vrtra. Modern 
science talks of three fundamental forces in nature: gravitation, 
strong nuclear and electroweak. Force of gravitation is the force 
between any two masses and is always attractive. It is the force that 
acts over long range and holds solar system and galaxies together. 
Indra can not be the force of gravitation, as gravitation is an 
attractive force. Strong nuclear force is responsible for keeping 
atomic nucleus together, thus Indra can not be this force either, 
because the force represented by Indra must be long range. 
Electroweak force consists of weak nuclear force and 
electromagnetic force. Weak nuclear force is a very short-range 
force acting at a distance of around 10-17 meter, and we are 
considering here a force that acts on a cosmic scale. Thus weak 
nuclear force is also ruled out. Electromagnetic force consists of 
electric force and magnetic force. Both of these forces can be either 
attractive or repulsive and can act over long distances. Indra will be 
identified here as electric force based on Further evidence in the 
Vedic literature. In Rgveda 4.17.13 Indra has been called 
"Asanimana" meaning one who possesses thunderbolt. 
Furthermore, Kausitaki Brahmana 6.9 says that Indra is Asani 
(thunderbolt). The Satapatha Brahmana says: 

Who is Indra and who is Prajapati? Thunder is Indra and Yajna
is Prajapati." Satapatha Brahmana 11.6.3.9 

 61



 
 

Thus it becomes clear that Indra is related to electrical 
phenomena and his identification with electric force is on solid 
grounds. 
 
 
 
5.4: Surface Tension 
 
Our next agenda should be now to identify Vrtra. We know that 
Vrtra covers the whole universe and is a force of contraction. This 
brings immediate realization that Vrtra is none other than the 
surface tension of the universe. A drop of fluid tends to become 
spherical in order to minimize its surface area. There is energy 
associated with every surface, and every system tries to minimize 
its energy. This is why bubbles are spherical, because sphere is the 
configuration of the lowest surface area. If the universe is trying to 
expand, its surface area is going to increase, which will increase the 
total surface energy of the universe. Surface tension will act to 
minimize the surface area of the universe, in other words surface 
tension will try to contract the universe. The electric repulsion force 
must be stronger than the surface tension force in order for the 
universe to expand. This is the grand cosmic battle of Indra and 
Vrtra, and it is given so much prominence in the Rgveda for the 
reason that outcome of this battle determines whether there will be 
a universe or not. The Rgveda describes this grand battle in various 
ways, one of them is the killing of wild boar. 

5.5: The Slaying of Varaha 
 
Varaha has the apparent meaning of wild boar. It is derived from root 
"Vr" and etymologically means one who covers. Thus etymological 
meanings of Varaha and Vrtra are same. It is not a coincidence that 
the Rgveda describes the killing of Varaha as 

 62



 

well as Vrtra. The slaying of Varaha is attributed to Visnu and Trita. 
 
 

"Visnu killed Varaha and stole cooked food."    Rgveda 1.61.7 
 

"Trita, strengthened by Indra, killed Varaha using iron 
fingernails." Rgveda 10.99.6 

 

Varaha and Vrtra both represent the surface of the universe. 
Trita is said to have fingernails of iron, which represents the 11 

magnetic properties of Trita. Some of my readers who know about 11 
modem cosmological theories in detail, might be considering this 1 
discussion on surfaces absurd, as the universe is not supposed to I 
have any surface in the first place. The reality is scientists have * 
already found the evidence of surface phenomena at work on 
cosmological scales, but have failed to identify it as such. Scientists 
have recently found bubbles and voids at cosmic scale, a hallmark of 
surface tension at work. 
 

5.6: Bubbles and Voids in Space 
 

One of the most important assumptions underlying the Big Bang 
cosmology is that the universe is uniform everywhere. This means 
mat all parts of the universe have same mass-energy density and 
structure. In such considerations, choosing the appropriate unit of 
mass-energy dispersion becomes important. We know that planets 
and stars are not uniformly distributed. Scientists chose a larger 
scale, and at first believed that galaxies are spread uniformly over 
space. When Hubble conducted a survey of44,000 galaxies, he did 
not find them uniformly distributed, instead he found considerable 
clustering. His survey was followed by that of Fritz Zwicky in 
1938 and again it was found that galaxies were clunked, and not 
uniformly distributed. This finding gave rise to 

 63



 
 

the consideration that cluster of galaxies is an appropriate unit, and 
that clusters of galaxies are spread uniformly over space. Our 
galaxy, Milky Way, is part of a cluster of twenty five galaxies. 
French astronomer Gerard de Vaucouleurs conducted a survey on 
an even bigger scale in 1950, and found that even clusters of 
galaxies were not uniformly distributed. He grouped clusters of 
galaxies in superclusters spreading 200 million light years. 
Scientists soon came to believe that supercluster was the 
appropriate unit over which the universe looked uniform. Probing 
even further scientists have recently found that superclusters are 
located over the surface of giant bubbles. Inside of the bubbles are 
large voids containing no galaxies, almost bereft of matter and 
energy. We have a reference to this large scale structure in 
the Satapatha Brahmana: 
 
"When Apah were heated, foam (Phena) was created." 

Satapatha Brahmana 6.1.3.2 
 
Apah means water and its scientific meaning will be discussed in 

the chapter "Return of the Elements". There are ample references to 
prove that Vedic sages considered Apah to pervade whole universe. 
Not knowing the real meaning of Apah, all religions and mythologies 
talk of a universe filled with water in the beginning. The verse 
quoted above clearly proves that Vedic sages considered surface 
phenomena to be at work, so that Apah were organized as foam. The 
finding of bubbles on the large scale structure of the universe is a 
clear proof that the surface tension has been at work during the 
evolution of the universe. As modern scientists have failed to take 
the surface tension in account, it is no wonder that after seventy years 
of rigorous research by the best brains of our times, the Big Bang 
cosmology can not even predict the evolution of the galaxies. The 
reason is clear. Whole framework of the Big Bang cosmology is 
wrong. The chapters on the Big Bang and the Vedic cosmology 
discuss this further.    

 64



 
  

5.7: Deeds of Indra 
 
 

More than 250 hymns have been dedicated to Indra in the Rgveda. 
Another fifty plus hymns sing the praises of Indra in combination with 
other gods like Vayu, Varuna, Agni, Visnu, Soma and Brhaspati. The 
Vedic sages do not get tired of describing the glorious deeds of Indra. 
More than one fourth of the Rgvedic verses are about Indra. The hymn 
traditionally considered the most favorite hymn of Indra is presented 
below. This hymn being the most important hymn about Indra is 
helpful in understanding the Indus Valley Seals as well. 

Rgveda 2.12 Sage: Grtsamada Bhargava 
Saunaka; Deity: Indra; Metre: Tristupa 

1. Who is first among the gods, who after being bom adorned gods 
from his actions, from whose impulse earth and heaven tremble, who 
is famous for his strength, he, O people, is Indra. 
2. Who made the trembling earth firm, who pacified the angry 
mountains, who measured the wide atmosphere, who supported the 
heaven, he, O people, is Indra. 
3. Who killed the serpent and made seven rivers flow, who got the 
cows hidden by Bala out, who created Agni between two rocks, who 
kills enemies in wars, he, O people, is Indra. 
4. Who has made the shaking world, who has put Dasa varna in a 
hidden place below, who conquers like the hunter killing dogs, the 
lord who snatches nourishing material from enemies, he, O people, is 
Indra. 
5. About whom people ask where is the awful, and say that he does 
not exist, he the lord destroys the nourishing material of enemies, so 
have respect for him, because he, O people, is Indra. 
6. Who instigates rich and poor, knowledgeable, needy and poet, 
who has beautiful cheeks, who protects those extracting Soma 

 65



 
 

juice using stones, he, O people, is Indra. 
7. Whose horses are, whose cows are, whose villages are, whose all 
chariots are, who created sun and Usa, who leads the waters, he, O 
people, is Indra. 
8. Whom earth and heaven moving together call for help, whom 
high and lowly both enemies call, whom two warriors sitting on the 
same chariot call in several ways, he, O people, is Indra. 
9. Without whose help people can't win, whom warriors call for 
protection, who became world's model, who moves the unmovable, 
he, O people, is Indra. 
10. Who kills the sinners and ignorants by Vajra, who does not let the 
arrogants win, who kills the Dasyus, he, O people, is Indra. 
11. Who found Sambara hiding in the mountains during fortieth 
winter, who killed the valiant serpent and sleeping Danu, he, 0 
people, is Indra. 
12. Who is seven-rayed strong bull, who freed seven rivers for 
flowing, who holding Vajra in his hand killed Rohana riding on 
heaven, he, O people, is Indra. 
13. For whom earth and heaven bow, whose strength mountains fear, 
who drinks and protects Soma, who holds Vajra in his hand, 
he, O people, is Indra. 
14. Who protects those extracting and cooking Soma juice, who 
protects those reciting hymns and those active in worship, who 
increases by hymns, whose Soma is, whose wealth is, he, O 
people, is Indra. 

 
In verse three Indra is credited with getting the cows hidden by 

Bala out. Elsewhere in the Rgveda Indra is said to have killed. Bala 
and freed the cows hidden in mountains (Rgveda 1.11.5, 2.14.3, 
8.14.8). Similarly, Indra frees cows well hidden in rocks (Rgveda 
5.30.4,6.43.3). According to Rgveda 6.39.2 Indra breaks apart 
mountains. This mountain is the surface of the universe. I have also 
earlier shown that Vrtra is the surface of the universe. Maitrayani 
Samhita 4.5.1 shows the equivalence of mountain 

 66



 

and Vrtra by saying "Girirvai Vitro", meaning mountain is indeed ' 
Vrtra. In Vedic cosmology the surface of the universe is mountain, 
I and the seven rivers of the Rgveda originate from this mountain, 
i.e. surface of the universe. The cows hidden in mountain are not ' 
ordinary cows. In the Rgveda Indra is shown as having affection 
for cows, and this quality later on passes to Lord Visnu during 
the age of the Puranas. 
"Indra desires to obtain cow." Rgveda 8.17.15 
"Indra always wins the battle for cows." 

Rgveda 4.17.10,4.21.4 
"Indra loves cows." Rgveda 1.84.11 

 

The shelter for cows is called Gotra in Sanskrit. Gotra is same 
as the mountains which Indra breaks (Rgveda 1.51.3, 3.30.21, 
3.43.7, 4.16.8, 10.103.7). This is why he is called Gotrabhid, 
breaker of Gotra, in Rgveda 6.17.2 and 10.103.6. It is due to his 
association with cows, that Indra is called bull in the Vedas. 

5.8: Indra, the Bull 

Asfco Parpola in his book "Deciphering the Indus Script" 
describes an amulet from Harappa (3305) showing a deity with 
bull's legs and a raised club[2]. Surprisingly he does not give any 
clue as to what this figure could represent. Proponents of the 
Aryan Invasion theory use the Vedas, Brahmanas, Upanisads and 
Puranas selectively to prove that the Indus Valley Civilization was 
Dravidian Civilization. For this reason they find representation 
Rudra and Varuna in the Indus seals, because Rudra and Varuna 
have been declared as a borrowing from the Indus Valley 
civilisation. In fact, there is no such thing as borrowing from the 

 67



 

Indus Valley Civilization, because the Indus Valley Civilization is 
the Vedic Civilization. This amulet 3305 from Harappa is the proof 
of my thesis. The deity has bull's legs, and Indra is considered bull 
in the Vedas. In Rgveda 2.12.12 Indra is called a 
bull, and so in the other Vedas. 
 
"Bull is the form of Indra:" Atharvaveda 9.4.7-8 

 
The deity is depicted as holding a raised club in one of his 

hands in this amulet. Now, the Vedas repeatedly describe Indra as 
holding Vajra is his hand. Thus, there is no room to doubt that this 
deity is the representation of Indra. With this identification, we 
have permanently buried the Aryan Invasion Theory and the thesis 
of Indus Valley Civilization being Dravidian. There is no way 
representation of Indra in Harappa can fit in these theories. Indra is 
supposed to have destroyed this civilization, how could these 
people be worshipping him!!! The mighty deeds of Indra were 
known all over the world and people worshipped Indra everywhere 
albeit under different names. 

5.9: Mighty Hercules 
 
Magis of Asia minor identified the Iranian god Verethraghna with 
Greek Heracles, who later became Roman Hercules. Verethraghna 
is only a deformation of Vrtraghna meaning slayer of Vrtra. 
Iranians forgot Indra, but turned one of his names in a heroic 
god. 

5.10: Serpent as Evil 
 
You might be wondering why Vedic sages describe Vrtra as a; 
serpent. A serpent does something very important several times 

 

 68



 

 

during its lifetime. It changes its skin. What about the universe? As 
universe expands, its surface is destroyed, but another surface is 
created instantly. In effect the universe keeps changing its skin. Thus 
battle of Indra and Vrtra never stops, it carries on all the time. This is 
also one reason that this battle is described all through the Rgveda 
again and again and again. My opinion is that the Rgveda contains 
the information on the evolution of the universe as it has happened, 
and divided the evolution in seven important phases, each phase 
being described by one of the seven sages. The slaying of Vrtra has 
an interesting counterpart in mythology. Vrtra never dies as the 
universe always has a surface. In mythology also one encounters 
demons that rise from dead again and again. The depiction of Vrtra as 
a serpent and an enemy of Indra made serpent as a symbol of evil all 
over the ancient world, as Vedic ideas were spread far and wide. 

In the Bible, Satan is depicted as a serpent, who induces Eve to 
eat the forbidden apple (Genesis 3.1-15). The depiction of serpent as a 
force of evil is based on the Vedic description of Vrtra as a serpent. In 
Greek mythology, the fight between Indra and Vrtra becomes the
fight between Apollo and Pytho. Pytho, the great serpent, had 
swallowed all the waters just like Vrtra, before he was slayed. After 
the slaying Apollo also fled in terror just like Indra did (Rgveda 
1.32.14). Apollo was also considered Sun-god just like Indra during 
the period of Brahmanas. We should note here that Indra is not a Sun-
god in the Rgveda. In another version, the epic war becomes the fight 
between Perseus and Medusa, who carries several snakes on her head. 

Back home in India, serpent did not become a force of evil. After 
all, here it was well known that this battle was not about good and 
evil. Indra and Vrtra both have important place in the evolution of 
the cosmos. In later mythology serpent on one hand became die 
garland of Lord Siva, and on the other hand became the companion 
of Lord Visnu. The serpent became Sesanaga, a serpant with several 
heads. Lord Visnu rests on the bed of his 

 69



 

 

coils and Sesanaga also provides shade to Lord Visnu by spreading 
his heads above. Thus Sesanaga covers Lord Visnu the same way 
Vrtra covers the universe. We should remember that in Hinduism 
universe is not different from God. In Vedic science, the universe 
has a tripartite division into earth, atmosphere and heaven and in 
this division lies the ultimate secret of the universe. 

 70



 

"Observations are to be regarded as discrete, discontinuous events. 
Between these are gaps which we cannot fill in." - Erwin 

Schrodinger 
 

6. Parallel Spaces 

The tripartite division of the universe in Prthivi (earth), Antariksa 
(atmosphere) and Dyau (heaven) is very well established in the Vedic 
literature. Each of them is called a "Loka" and thus the universe is 
"Triloka", consisting of three lokas. Therefore the God is called 
"Trilokmatha" meaning the lord of three lokas. Prthivi means the broad 
and extended one, Antariksa means what exists in between, and Dyau 
means bright. Like other technical words in the Vedas, these three 
words have exact scientific meanings different from their apparent 
meanings. These three lokas were formed by the division of the egg-
shaped universe. 
 

"At the end of thousand years Egg was divided in two by Vayu." 
Vayu Purana 24.73 

 

The universe was divided in two. This division is like a change of 
phage of chemical substances. Consider a fluid that transforms 

 71



 

into a solid and liquid phase due to change in temperature. 
Whenever two phases are formed, there is always an interface 
between these phases. Antariksa is the interface between Prthivi and 
Dyau. Taittiriya Upanisad 1.3.1 says that Antariksa is the junction of 
Prthivi and Dyau. The Satapatha Brahmana says: 
 
"These lokas were together in the beginning. Earth and heaven then 
separated and the space between them became Antariksa." 

Satapatha Brahmana 7.1.2.23 
 
Three lokas were formed not because the universe was divided in 

three, but because it was divided in two. Should the interface be 
considered a separate phase? Scientists are divided on this issue. 
Gibbs does not consider interface to be a separate phase and instead 
draws an imaginary plane through the interface dividing the phases 
in two. Guggenheim on the other hand considers interface to be a 
separate phase, and assigns all the properties to an interface that a 
phase can have[l]. 

The most important concept of the Vedas is the division of the 
universe. Without a proper understanding of this division the Vedas 
will seem meaningless. The Vedas themselves declare this 
emphatically. How was the egg divided? Was it divided in an upper 
half and lower half? To answer this question let's consider the first 
verse of the Purusa hymn again. 

6.1: Three Spaces 
 
"Purusa has thousand heads, thousand eyes and thousand legs. 
He is covering Bhumi from all around, and is beyond also in ten- 
finger form." Rgveda 10.90.1 

 
You have already seen that Bhumi here means the entire 

universe. Bhumi and Prthivi have similar meaning and have been 
 

 72



 

used interchangeably in the Vedas. In Rgveda 10.81.3 the word 
"Dyavabhumi" has been used, while in most places "Dyavaprthivi" 
is used. Sayana in his commentary on Atharvaveda 6.18.2 says that 
Bhumi is Prthivi. Sayana in his commentary (Rgveda Bhasya) on 
Rgveda 10.90.1 and Mahldhara in his commentary (Yajurveda 
Bhasya) on Yajurveda 39.1 say that "Bhumim 
Brahmandagolakarupam" meaning Bhumi is the round universe. 
Thus I am on very solid grounds to consider Prthivi as the universe. 
If Prthivi is the universe, then what are Antariksa and Dyau. After all 
the universe consists of Prthivi, Antariksa and Dyau. I hope my 
readers can guess where my arguments are headed. The egg was not 
divided in upper half and lower half, but in an intermingled web. It 
is a web that pervades the whole universe. This web is what is 
considered Mayajala meaning a measured web. Maya is a powerful 
term in Hinduism, which has now come to mean an illusion that the 
universe is. However, Maya is formed from root "ma" to measure, 
and could not have meant illusion originally. The universe is made 
on scientific principles, and that's why it is well measured. The 
universe consists of three intertwined webs, Prthivi, Antariksa and 
Dyau. Prthivi can be given a scientific name "observer space". 
Prthivi is our space, the space in which we live and die, whatever we 
can see and observe. Earth, sun, stars, galaxies all are part of Prthivi. 
From one end of the universe to the other end is the expanse of 
Prthivi, and that is what the name Prthivi means: the broad and 
extended one. Dyau will be termed "Light space" because light 
propagates in this space as you will find in more detail later, and 
Antariksa will be termed "Intermediate space" as this space exists in 
between observer space and light space. Prthivi, Antariksa and Dyau 
exist at every point in space. If we could make a powerful 
microscope that could make observations at the most subtle level, 
then we will see the space divided in three strands belonging to 
observer space, intermediate space and light space. A verse from the 
Yajurveda clearly states that the 

 73



 

division of universe was done on a very subtle level, and not on a 
gross level. 
 
"I place earth and heaven inside you. I place wide atmosphere 
inside you." Yajurveda 7.5 

 
The Vedic sages had the capability of looking at such a subtle 

level, which is beyond the reaches of modern science. The concept of 
Kosas is related to observations at different scales. Taittiriya Upanisad 
2.2-5 describes the various levels of observation. The grossest level of 
observation is called Annamaya Kosa, which corresponds to 
macroscopic observation. Pranamaya Kosa refers to observations at a 
level more subtle than Annamaya Kosa. This may be referring to 
microscopic observation. Next three levels of observation in order of 
subtlety are Manomaya Kosa, Vrjnanamaya Kosa and Anandamaya 
Kosa. 

At present, modern science is not capable of observing at such 
subtle scales. Our observations are limited to observer space, in 
extreme cases our observations can reach the intermediate space, but 
our observations never reach the light space, which is hidden very 
deep. These three spaces are the three legendary steps of Visnu in the 
Rgveda. 

6.2: The Steps of Visnu 
 
Visnu together with Brahma and Mahesa forms a trinity in 
Hinduism. The form of Visnu in the Puranas is slightly different 
from that in the Vedas. Visnu is a friend of Indra in the Rgveda,
who helps Indra in the slaying of Vrtra. Though hymns dedicated  to 
Visnu are few in the Rgveda, this does not mean that Visnu has less 
significance in the eyes of the Vedic sages. In the Rgveda the 
number of hymns and mantras are carefully chosen. Three complete 
hymns have been dedicated to Visnu in the Rgveda 

 

 74



 

 

(1.154, 1.156, 7.100), which correspond to the three spaces of the 
universe. There are few mantras separately for Visnu (1.22.17-21, 
1.155.4-6, 7.99.1-3, 7.99.7). He is also invoked with other gods in 
some hymns and mantras ( Rgveda 1.22.16, 1.155.1-3, 5.3.3,6.69, 
7.99.4-6). Visnu is derived from root "Vis" meaning to enter or 
pervade, and he is called so because he pervades the whole universe. 
Brahmanda Purana 1.4.25 says that he is called Visnu because he has 
entered in everything. Three steps of Visnu are referred to several 
times in the Vedas (Rgveda 1.22.17,1.154.3, 1.155.4, Atharvaveda 
7.26.5). What are his three steps? Yajurveda 2.25 and Satapatha 
Brahmana (1.1.2.13,1.9.3.9,3.6.3.3) identify the three steps as the 
heaven, atmosphere and earth. Taittiriya Samhita 2.4.12.3 says that 
Visnu established his one third in earth, one third in atmosphere and 
one third in heaven. Obviously, earth, atmosphere and heaven were 
considered to be of comparable extent. The most important aspect of 
Visnu's three steps is that the whole universe is covered by these steps. 
 

The Satapatha Brahmana 1.2.5.1-7 tells a story about the three 
steps of Visnu. Devas (gods) and Asuras (demons) were sons of 
Prajapati, and were always fighting each other. Once Devas became 
weak and Asuras captured the earth. Asuras started to divide earth 
among themselves. Then Devas brought Visnu forward and asked for 
his share. Asuras saw that Visnu is a dwarf, so they agreed to give 
Visnu as much land as he could occupy by his body. Devas thought 
that Visnu is Yajna, so if Asuras gave land equal to him, then they 
have given whole earth. They enclosed Visnu with metres and started 
to expand the Yajiia. Devas thus obtained whole earth for themselves. 
This story further develops in the Puranas, Mahabharata and 
Ramayana. Asura Ml was performing a Yajiia, which would give him 
unlimited powers. Devas went to Visnu and asked for help. Visnu took 
birth as son of Kasyapa and Aditi. He did not grow much and remained 
a dwarf. In this form he went to Bali and asked for land. Bali agreed to 
give him as much land as he could occupy in 

 75



 

 

three steps. Visnu measured the whole universe in his three steps 
and Devas became masters of the universe again. In some Puranas, 
Visnu covered the whole universe in only two steps, and there was 
nothing left for the third step. 

Visnu can be identified with the universe itself. This dwarf 
incarnation refers to the early universe, when the universe was very 
small. Visnu's first step is the observer space, his second step is the 
intermediate space, and his third and remotest step is the light space. 
We get further proof of this in the Vedas. In his three steps rests the 
whole universe (Rgveda 1.154.2, Yajurveda 23.49). The most 
notable aspect of Visnu's three steps is that the third step is 
considered very remote and beyond the reach of anyone. His two 
steps can be known by humans, but third step is beyond the sight of 
humans and flight of birds (Rgveda 1.155.5). Wise people know 
earth and atmosphere, but Visnu knows the remotest (Rgveda 
7.99.1). In Rgveda 1.155.3 heaven is explicitly referred as Visnu's 
third abode. The light space (Dyau) can not be observed by humans. 
If Dyau meant heaven in the Vedas, this won't make any sense, as 
constituents of heaven like the sun and stars are easily seen by 
human eyes. Among the brave acts of Visnu in the Rgveda is the 
slaying of the wild boar. 
 
"Visnu killed Varaha and stole cooked food."    Rgveda 1.61.7 

 
The slaying of wild boar (Varaha) has been discussed in the last 

chapter. Varaha represents the surface of the universe. As Visnu 
(the universe) expands, surface of the universe is broken, and thus 
Varaha is killed. Ironically in the Puranas, Visnu takes incarnation 
as a Varaha. There is a different scientific explanation of the 
incarnations of Visnu, which is discussed in a later chapter. In the 
Rgveda Indra and Visnu are shown as close friends. Visnu and 
Indra expand the spaces in Rgveda 6.69.5. In the Bralimanas, Visnu 
comes to mean the sun as the youngest son of Aditi, but there is no 
reason to suspect such an identification in the Vedas. 

 76



 

Visnu is clearly depicted as being different from Surya (sun) in Rgveda 
7.99.4. 

6.3: The Hidden Spaces 
 

There are several verses in the Vedas that support the interpretation of 
Prthivi, Antariksa and Dyau as the observer space, intermediate space 
and light space respectively. Prthivi and Dyau are described as 
following: 
"One of them is hidden and other is observable. There ways are 
same still divided differently." Rgveda 3.55.15 
 
All three spaces are described beautifully in the following verse: 
 

"Continuously moving, very wide three are positioned one on top of 
another. Two of them are hidden and only one is seen." 

Rgveda 3.56.2 
Intermediate space and light space are considered hidden, which is 

completely true. We can spend our lifetimes without ever realizing 
that these two spaces even exist. Out of these two, light space is 
considered hidden deeper than intermediate space. All through the 
Rgveda we come across references to the hidden space. A verse from 
the Rgveda proclaims: 
"Agni, I know your three places and three forms. I know your 
place that is protected in various ways. I know your name that is 
m very secret place, I know the place from which you have been 
barn." Rgveda 10.45.2 

Here the three places of Agni are observer, intermediate and 
lightspace, and his three forms are Agni (fire), Vayu (air) and 

 

 77



 

Surya (sun) respectively. The very secret place is light space, and 
Agni's name in that place is Surya. The place from which Agni is 
born is the golden womb. 

In Rgveda 1.159.4 earth and heaven are described by following 
epithets: "Jam! sayoni mithuna samokasa". Jam! means siblings, 
sayoni means born from same womb, mithuna means couple, and 
samokasa means having same abode. This explicitly refers to being 
born together, lying one top of other like a couple and being spread 
all through the universe. The concept of Dyau as the hidden space is 
the most important concept of Vedic science without understanding 
which the Vedas will seem meaningless. The Rgveda itself states this 
in no uncertain terms. 
 
"Vedic mantras are in the never-decaying remotest sky, where all 
the gods reside. One who does not know that, what will he do 
with Vedic mantras? One who knows that, they (gods) stay with 
him." Rgveda 1.164.39 

 
The remotest sky is the light space, which is the abode of energy. 

Now that we have a precise understanding of what earth and heaven 
represent, this is the right time to appreciate a beautiful hymn 
dedicated to them. 

Rgveda 1.185 Sage: Agastya Maitravaruni; Deity: 
Dyavaprthivi; 

Metre: Tristupa 

1. Which was born first and which later? How were they born? Who 
knows O wise people? They hold the universe by their strength and 
always keep rotating like a wheel. 
2. Two unmoving without legs hold many moving, with legs, in their 
womb. May heaven and earth protect us from sin like parents protect 
the son near them always. 
3. I ask for the sinless, never diminishing, bright, non-violent 

 

 78



 

 

donation of Aditi. May heaven and earth produce that wealth for the 
worshipper. May heaven and earth protect us from sin. 
4. Heaven and earth, parent of gods, protect people without becoming 
angry. May we with day and night of gods retain the favor of both. 
May heaven and earth protect us from sin. 
5. Two young ladies always moving together, having the ends 
together, sisters, staying near father, smell the center of the universe. 
May heaven and earth protect us from sin. 
6. I call by truth the wide, great, provider of space, progenitors of 
gods for protection. The beautiful ones hold immortality. May heaven 
and earth protect us from sin. 
7. I bow and praise wide earth, whose end is very far away, in this 
Yajiia. Those lucky and victorious ones hold everything. May heaven 
and earth protect us from sin. 
8. If we have sinned against gods, or friends, or the lord of everything 
born, may our intelligence be able to destroy these sins. May heaven 
and earth protect us from sin. 
9. May both, worthy of praise by men, protect me. May both provide 
us with means of protection. O gods, we noble ones desire plenty of 
wealth to live happily and donate generously. 
10.1, of good intellect, speak that first truth for earth and heaven. 
Those two living near protect us from sins. Protect us like mother and 
father. 
11. Mother earth and father heaven, what I ask for you here, let that 
become true. Become the protector of gods. Let us receive food, 
strength and long life. 

 

While most often earth is considered the mother and heaven the 
father, this representation is not unique. In verse five, both earth and 
heaven are considered ladies, and God is considered die lather of both. 
In verse seven the ends of earth are considered very for and Yajna 
takes place at the ends. The ends are very far away, because observer 
space spans across the whole universe, and at the boundary of the 
universe the creation of matter and 

 79



 

 

energy takes place, which is called Yajna. The transformation of 
matter into energy is related to the concept of immortality of the 
gods in the Vedas. 

 80



 
"We are like butterflies who flutter for a day and think it is forever." 

- Carl Sagan 
 

7. The Seat of Immortality 

Once you realize what Prthivi, Antariksa and Dyau stand for, your 
immediate concern will be to know what are their most distinguishing 
features. Prthivi is considered "Martyaloka" in Hindu scriptures, 
meaning where life has a limited span and death can not be avoided. 
 

"Immortals purified three brilliant forms of Agni. Out of them 
one who eats was placed where death is inevitable, other two 
went in sibling Lokas." Rgveda 3.2.9 
 

In this verse Prthivi and other two spaces are described as 
siblings. Modern physics tells us about the cosmic dance of 
the particles. Everywhere in the universe particles are being created 
and annihilated continuously. These particles have a lifespan 
between the creation and annihilation. In the Vedas Prthivi is 
the abode of particles, which are created and annihilated. These 
particles are given the name "Janah" meaning people because 

 81



 

they live and die like people. The Vedas talk about five type of 
particles again and again and give them the name "Pancajanah" 
meaning five people. In the commentaries on the Vedas we often 
encounter the confusion between four Varnas and five people. The 
system of four Varnas was a social order consisting of Brahmana, 
Ksatriya, Vaisya and Sudra. Five people refer to five type of particles, 
and commentators not knowing this difference often describe five 
people as Brahmana, Ksatriya, Vaisya, Sudra and Nisada (fisherman). 
This makes no sense as fisherman obviously belongs to Sudra category 
and can not be counted separately. Dyau is the abode of energy. Energy 
is not created and annihilated like particles, therefore energy can be 
considered eternal or immortal. Once Dyau became heaven, and 
various forms of energy became gods, gods became immortal in their 
heavenly abode. The Vedas frequently describe gods as being immortal 
meaning that energy is eternal. Yajurveda 32.10 says that in the third 
abode immortal gods live. The third abode is heaven or the light space. 

7.1: Wedding of Vivasvana 
 
The concept of hidden space has been elaborated in the Vedas by 
various examples. The Vedas talk about the same phenomenon in 
various ways. The tale of Vivasvana and Saranyu is told to illustrate 
the formation of three spaces. 
 
"Tvasta is about to perform the marriage ceremony of his daughter and 
this whole universe has come to attend. Mother of Yama was married, 
great wife of Vivasvana disappeared." 

Rgveda 10.17.1 
 
"Immortal was hidden for mortals, similar lady was made and given to 
Vivasvana. Saranyu was there and she conceived two 

 

 82



 

 

Asvins. She gave birth to twins (Yama and Yami)." 
 Rgveda 10.17.2 

 

These two verses describe the early universe, when universe is 
divided in three spaces. Vivasvana is observer space and t Saranyu is 
light space during this period. Saranyu means quickly k moving, which 
is apt name considering that light propagates in that space. 
Disappearance of Saranyu is the concealment of light s space. Second 
verse makes the point clear where Saranyu is considered immortal. So 
who is the replacement of Saranyu? No name is given, but intermediate 
space fits the description very well. The presence of Saranyu in a hidden 
form matches very well with the concept of three spaces, and finally 
two very mysterious verses make sense. 

There is a Greek myth related to these verses. Zeus was 
unfaithful to his wife Hera on several occasions. Hera left Zeus , due to 
his romantic adventures and went to a place called Euboea. 

Zeus asked Cithaeron for advice, who suggested that he should 
perform a sham marriage. A wooden image of Plataea, daughter of 
Asopus, was made and Zeus performed the drama of marrying her. 
Hera heard of this and came to the scene. She tore the bridal veil and 
discovered the wooden image behind it. After knowing the truth she 
started living with Zeus again. 

Saranyu is the mother of two Asvins, but why are they called 
Asvins? Asvin is made from word "Asva" meaning horse. The 
Brahmana texts have come up with a story as an explanation. The 
Satapatha Brahmana tells that Saranyu assumed the form of a mare. 
Vivasvana took the form of a horse and mated her. From their 
intercourse two Asvins were bom. Again there is an exact Greek 
counterpart of this myth. Demeter Erinnys assumed the form of a mare 
and was pursued by Poseidon in the form of a stallion. Demeter was 
worshipped in the form of a woman with his head. This myth is not 
found in the Vedas and proves that Greek civilization is post-
brahmanic. 

 83



 

7.2: The Field 
 
Now we know that observer space is the abode of matter particles, and 
light space is the abode of energy. The question now is what is the 
significance of intermediate space? Intermediate space (Antariksa) is 
the abode of field. The principal deity of Antariksa 
is Vayu. 
 
"Vayu brightens in Antariksa."       Jaiminlya Brahmana 1.192 

 
Vayu being the deity of Antariksa, and Antariksa being in between 

Prthivi and Dyau, it makes perfect sense that universe was divided in 
two by Vayu (Vayu Purana 24.74). There are four complete hymns 
dedicated to Vayu in Rgveda (1.134,4.48, 10.168, 10.186). The 
meaning of Vayu is made clear by the following mantra. 
 
"Sun and rest of the universe is woven in string. What is that 
string, that is Vayu." Satapatha Brahmana 8.7.3.10 

 
Apparent meaning of Vayu is air. This verse clearly shows that 

here Vayu can not mean air. In fact there can not be a better definition 
of scientific term "field". Thus Prthivi, Antariksa and Dyau are the 
abodes of matter particles, field and energy respectively. Field is 
another form of energy, and therefore Yajurveda says: 
 
"Vayu has penetrating brightness." Yajurveda 1.24 

7.3: Fabric of the Universe 
 

If the space is an aggregate of three intertwined spaces, out of which 
we can observe only one directly, our space will seem to 

 84



 

us as having holes, as if part of it is missing. This is the realm of 
quantum physics, where particles seem to be taking quantum jumps, 
not moving continuously, because fabric of the universe is perforated. 
These holes are referred to in a verse in the Yajurveda. 
 
 
"May Prthivi, Vayu and Dyau complete your holes." 

Yajurveda 23.43 
 

Here Vayu represents intermediate space (Antariksa), as Vayu is 
the principal deity of Antariksa. Observer space (prthivi), intermediate 
space (Antariksa), and light space (Dyau) each are perforated, only all 
three together make the space complete without holes. According to 
the Vedas, earth and heaven were together initially and they were 
separated later by Vayu. These ideas traveled very widely all over the 
world. 

7.4: Heaven and Earth 
 

Prthivi is considered the mother and Dyau is considered the father in 
the Vedas, and they form a pair Dyavaprthivi together. One of the most 
beautiful verses of the Rgveda says: 
 

"Heaven is my father, brother atmosphere is my navel, and the 
great earth is my mother." Rgveda 1.164.33 
 

Another verse from the Atharvaveda says: 
 

"This land is my mother, I am the son of earth." 
Atharvaveda 12.1.12 

 
In their apparent meaning earth and heaven do not look like a pair 

as earth is negligibly small compared to heaven. In their 
 

 85



 

scientific meaning as observer and light spaces, the description of 
them as a pair looks perfect. In the Vedas Prthivi can not mean 
earth for the simple reason that the Vedas talk of three Prthivls, 
while there could not be more than one earth. 
 
"Adityas hold three earths and three heavens." 
Rgveda 2.27.8 
 
 
"Agni is established in first, second and third earth." 
Yajurveda 5.9 
 
The division of the universe in three spaces is at a very subtle level 
far beyond the capabilities of modern science to observe it, but 
Vedic scientists divided even that length in three, calling them 
upper, medium and lower. The story of the division of the universe 
in earth and heaven was very well known in ancient world, but their 
scientific meaning was known only to few outside India. These ideas 
were picked up by Semitic religions, without having the slightest 
clue as to their scientific meaning. Bible, Genesis 1.1 says that God 
created the heaven and the earth in the beginning. Koran 21.30 talks 
about the division of the universe in earth and heaven. In Greek 
mythology, in the beginning there was Chaos, a swirling formless 
mass, from which came Gaia, mother earth, and her consort Uranus, 
the heaven. In Egypt, Seb (earth) and Nut (heaven) formed a pair, 
from whom many gods were born. In Chinese creation myths an egg 
arises in emptiness. Pangu, the first god, was residing in the egg. 
Universe was divided in heaven (yang) and earth (yin), when the egg 
broke. Pangu held the heavens, so that earth would not be crushed. 
Pangu grew by ten foot everyday, and he died after 10,000 years. 
Animals and other features of earth were made from Pangu's body.
Yang is considered male and yin is considered female in Chinese 
myths. Maori tribes of New Zealand also believed in a divine pair 
Rangi (heaven) and Papa (earth). Mangaians and Samoans of South 

 

 86



 

 
Pacific along with Maoris of New Zealand and Acagchemem  natives 
in California held that heaven and earth were touching in the 
beginning and were pushed apart later. Among Greeks, Ouranos does 
the job of separating earth from heaven, while in Mangaians, god Ru 
does this work. Among Maoris, Tutenganahau thrusts earth and 
heaven apart. These ideas are Vedic ideas dispersed among inhabitants 
all around the globe. The world has completely forgotten where these 
ideas came from, because it happened a very long time ago during the 
dawn of human civilization. 

7.5: The Cosmic Tree 
 

Figure 7.1 shows a tree with two animal heads joined to it. These two 
animals are heaven and earth depicted according to the following 
verse in the Vedas: 
 

"Which is that tree from which earth and heaven have been 
formed? O wise people, ask about that which is holding the whole 
universe." Rgveda 10.81.4, Yajurveda 17.20 

 

In another verse mother earth and father heaven are described 
playing on a tree (Yajurveda 23.25). Analogy of God with a tree is 
well accepted in the Vedic literature. The Svetasvatara Upanisad 
says: 
 

"There is nothing beyond him, nothing smaller or bigger. He is 
the one staying in heaven like a tree. All this is created by complete 
Purusa." Svetasvatara Upanisad 3.9 

 

The tree chosen for this representation was sacred fig tree, called 
Asvattha in Sanskrit and now popularly known as the Pipala tree. 

 

 87



 

 

figure 7.1: Earth and heaven represented as animal 
heads coming out of a fig tree, a seal from 
Indus Valley (Marshall: Plate XC) 

 88



 

 

7.6: The Giant Tortoise 
 

One popular Hindu myth says that earth rests on the back of a giant 
tortoise. Another popular myth says that earth rests on the head of a 
serpent, Sesanaga. Earthquakes are supposed to take place when the 
tortoise or the serpent moves. Origin of the serpent myth is the story of 
serpent Vrtra. We will trace here the origin of tortoise myth. Like most 
of the beliefs of the Hindus, the origin of this myth can also be traced 
to the Vedas. The Vedas tell us the following: 
 

"Heaven is fierce and earth is firm due to him." 
Rgveda 10.121.5, Yajurveda 32.6 

 

We should note here that firm here is used in the sense of being 
very hard and not as stationary. Heaven (Dyau) is fierce because it is 
the abode of energy and earth (Prthivi) is firm because it is the abode 
of matter particles, which do not have wave like characteristics. Prthivi 
is considered like a tortoise in the Vedic scriptures. Tortoise has a very 
firm back without any hair on it. The observer space (Prthivi) is firm 
like the back of tortoise and it does not have hair as well. 
 

"This Prthivi was without hair earlier." 
Satapatha Brahmana 2.2.4.3 

 
"This Prthivi is like the back of the tortoise." 

Mahabharata, Santiparva, 300.6 
 

Hair refers to the field lines. Even modem physicists use similar 
analogy when they say that black holes do not have hair meaning that 
field lines can not emerge from a black hole. Prthivi does not have 
hair, because hair is characteristic of the field, and Hi© field resides in 
Antariksa. Vedic ideas were picked up by the 

 89



 

 

Semitic religions without having any clue as to the real scientific 
meaning behind these ideas. The Bible also says that earth was bald 
earlier in Genesis. In India massive efforts were made to the 
preserve the scientific meaning of the Vedas. The analogy between 
Prthivi and the back of tortoise was forgotten long time back, and 
then a myth generated which supposes that earth rests on the back 
of a giant tortoise and earthquakes take place when the tortoise 
turns. 

7.7: Geocentric Universe 
 
The firmness of earth is referred several times in the Bible, where 
firmness has been associated with immovability. In Psalm 93.1, 
96.10 and 104.5 it is said that earth has been fixed on its foundations 
and can not be moved. Concept of the firmness of observer space 
(earth) in the Vedas gave rise to the concept of immovability of 
earth in Semitic religions, and formed the basis of geocentric 
universe. In ancient and medieval times ideas after ideas marched 
from India and some of them were incorporated in the belief system 
of Semitic religions. According to the Bible and the Koran earth was 
created before sun. This is the result of confusion that took place in 
India as the Vedic knowledge was forgotten. 

As observer space and light space were separated in the very 
beginning of creation, it is very difficult to know how the process of 
separation started. 
 
"Which was born first and which later ? How were they born? 
Who knows?" Rgveda 1.185.1 

 
Rgveda 10.81.3 clearly states that both of them were born 

together, but later scriptures seem to be of the opinion that observer 
space was created first. 

 90



 

"This Prthivi was bom first among the Bhutas." 
Satapatha Brahmana 14.1.2.10

 

"This Prthivi was first created among the Lokas." 
Satapatha Brahmana 6.5.3.1 

 

In the Satapatha Brahmana we see Prthivi counted among three 
spaces (lokas), and as well as among five elements (Bhutas). 
Confusion of Prthivi with earth resulted in the belief that earth was 
older than sun, as sun is part of heaven. Prthivi was not hard when it 
was created according to Hindu scriptures. Earlier it was very soft, 
which gradually hardened. 

7.8: Superspace 
 

Beginning of this century saw the rise of the theory of relativity. 
Earlier scientists considered space and time as independent of each 
other. The theory of relativity gave rise to the concept of four 
dimensional space-time, in which space has three dimensions and time 
has one dimension. Although mathematically it is easy to incorporate 
time as one more dimension to space, physically it is not so easy to 
conceptualize. Though flow of time is affected by the curvature of 
space, is it strong enough evidence to think of tune as similar to 
space? We can move forward and backward in space, but we can not 
move backward in time, and we can move forward in time only at a 
fixed rate. Why should it be so in a four-dimensional universe is not 
satisfactorily explained by modem physics. 

Once the concept of four-dimensional universe gained ground, 
scientists tried to further expand it. One of the major triumph of Ae 
general theory of relativity was that it explained gravitation as the 
interaction of matter with the curvature of space-time. Soon scientists 
started to generalize the idea and proposed a universe 

 

 91



 

of even higher dimensions in order to explain electromagnetic force 
as another manifestation of the properties of space-time. These 
universes of higher assumed dimensions are called Superspaces. 
With the discovery of nuclear forces the number of dimensions 
needed to accommodate these forces also increased. The theory of 
Superspaces has not been perfected yet. The reason being that it is 
not easy to verify these theories. They propose more than one 
dimension of time, physical meaning of which is unclear. If there are 
more than four dimensions then why do not we observe them. 
Scientists believe that some of the dimensions are curled at a very 
subtle level. If you look at a cylinder, which has two dimensions, 
from far away, it looks like a line, which has only one dimension. 
Thus universe could have more dimensions than we are actually 
aware of. Professor Sylvester James Gates, String theorist at 
University of Maryland says that those other dimensions are curled 
up so tight, we'll never have to deal with them. Scientists have found 
that in order for Superspace theories to work, these spaces must have 
at least ten dimensions. We should recall that according to the 
Rgveda, the outside of the universe is ten-dimensional. Clearly, the 
universe is a Superspace in the framework of the Vedic cosmology. 
The Vedas imagine the inside of the universe to be different than 
outside. Inside of the universe is divided in the observer, 
intermediate and light spaces, each of which has only seven 
dimensions. 
 
"Seven were its enclosures (Paridhi), three times seven were made 
firelogs (Samidha)." Rgveda 10.90.15 

 
Here seven firelogs refer to seven dimensions each of the three 

spaces. Seven enclosures refer to curled dimensions. Vedic 
scientists had a clear conception of the geometry of the universe, 
and therefore we find exact numbers in the Vedas. The meaning of 
all these numbers is not clear to me at the present time. What is 
clear is that Vedas form the basis of Hindu way of life. The 

 

 92



The Seat of Immortality   93 
 

fscience of the Vedas has been incorporated in Hindu customs, so 
that Hindus do not forget the science behind. One of the most 
beautiful expressions of Vedic science is the custom of going round 
the fire seven times by the bride and groom during marriage 

 ceremony. In Vedic science the dimensions are called firelogs, 
meaning energy resides in them. The seven rounds around fire 
represent the seven curled dimensions of observer space. We have 
an explicit reference to the curled dimensions in following mantra. 

 

 "Directions are enclosed metres." 
 Satapatha Brahmana 8.5.2.3 
 

There are seven prominent metres and in this mantra they are 
related to the seven dimensions of observer space. The Vedas consider 
dimensions to exist inside and outside the universe, and also consider 
the dimensions to have magnetic properties. 

 

"Directions are inside the universe and outside as well." 
 Satapatha Brahmana 6.5.2.7 

  

"Directions have properties of iron." 
 Satapatha Brahmana 13.2.10.3

Here by iron, magnetic properties are meant. We should note 
that apparent meaning of these mantras makes no sense at all. Once 
we know the scientific meaning of these mantras, then these 
mantras reveal the mind boggling achievements of Vedic sages. 

.  7.9: Trisira Visvarupa 
 

One of the legendary deeds of Indra is the slaying of Visvarupa,  son 
of Tvasta. Following two verses from the Rgveda describe this 
legend). 

93
 



 

 

"Instigated by Indra, he Aptya (Trita), knowledgeable of 
forefather's weaponry, fought for long period. Trita killed the 
three-headed with seven rays, and obtained the cows of Tvasta's son"
 Rgveda 10.8.8 
 
"Indra, protector of truthful people, shattered very strong and 
haughty. He, calling the cows, cut three heads of Tvasta's son 
Visvarupa." Rgveda 10.8.9 

 
Trisira means three-headed and Visvarupa means shape of universe. 

The three heads of the universe are the end points of Prthivi, Antariksa 
and Dyau. As each of these three spaces exist at every point in 
universe, these three exist at the boundary of the universe as well. Thus 
killing of Trisira Visvarupa is the same as that of killing of Vrtra, and 
both represent the expansion of the universe. Seven rays of Trisira 
Visvarupa are the seven dimensions of the universe. Figure 7.2 shows 
Trisira Visvarupa as found on a seal of the Indus Valley Civilization. 
Some scholars have tried to explain the three heads of the animal as 
only one head in three different positions. This explanation is the result 
of their unfamiliarity with the Rgveda or their prejudice in considering 
the Indus Valley people different from the Vedic people. 

In the Aitareya Brahmana, Indra kills three-headed son of Tvasta 
named Vairupa. Vairupa was considered a Brahmana, and Indra 
commits a grave sin by killing him, so that he had to atone for it. A 
parallel myth is found among Greeks as well. Apollo also commits a 
sin by slaying Pytho the dragon and had to be purified. What is 
important is that this story of atonement is not found in the Vedas. 
Thus Greeks borrowed their myths not from the Vedas, but from the 
Brahmanas which had been written and spread all around the globe 
before Greek Civilization came into being. 

 94



 

 

Figure 7.2: Trisira Visvarupa, a seal from 
Indus Valley (Marshall: Plate CXII)

 95



 

 

7.10: Dark Matter 
 
One of the key features of the Big Bang Cosmology is dark matter. 
The universe is supposed to have a theoretical mass-energy density in 
order to have existed for so long, and on the other hand observed 
mass-energy density is far lower than that. Most observations put the 
observed density at 10 % of theoretical density. So what happened to 
90 % of the mass-energy that should be there, but is not really there? 
Scientists have given this missing mass-energy the name dark matter. 
At present scientists have no clue as to what could be dark matter. 

One popular theory is that dark matter consists of massive 
neutrinos. The neutrinos that scientists are familiar with have no mass 
or very small mass. On the other hand dark matter has to be taken 
into account, as its gravitational pull affects the evolution of the 
universe. Vedic sages were also very familiar with the concept of 
dark matter. The Rgveda talks about the dark matter in the following 
verses: 
 
"All that is born, is his one fourth, his three fourth is immortal in 
heaven." Rgveda 10.90.3 
 
"Three-fourth of Purusa is above, his one fourth is born again 
and again." Rgveda 10.90.4 
 
"Speech has four quarters, which knowledgeable people know. 
Three of them are hidden and not known by people. People speak 
only the fourth one." Rgveda 1.164.45 

 
The first two verses establish that only 25 % of mass-energy is 

located in the observer space, while 75 % of mass-energy is located 
in the light space. Our measurements can reach only 25 % of the total 
mass-energy of the universe. It is this 25 % of mass-energy that 
keeps being created and annihilated as particles 

 96



 

 

in observer space. The third verse refers to the same phenomenon, 
however it gives the name speech to the mass-energy of the  universe. 

The Vedas talk about the same phenomenon in various forms as 
illustrations so that key concepts are not forgotten. It is 

very clear that the Vedas consider 75 % of the mass-energy of the  
universe to be located in the light space in the form of pure energy. In 
Hindu scriptures earth and heaven together with fire, air and water form 
the five elements from which everything in the universe is made. As 
modern science has shown, the idea of these five elements constituting 
the universe is very primitive. Now that we know the real scientific 
meaning of some of these elements, we are in a position to appreciate 
the thinking of the Vedic sages. We will now discuss in more detail the 
scientific jmeaning of the rest of the elements, and find out that the 
ingredients of everything in the universe are indeed five elements. 

 

 97



 

98



 

The essential reality is a set of fields." 
- Steven Weinberg 

 

8. Return of the Elements 

In ancient India concept of five elements was very well known. These 
five elements were earth, water, sky, fire and air. Greeks borrowed this 
concept from India, leaving out the sky element. The concept of sky 
as an element was considered very abstruse by Greeks. The scientific 
meaning of these elements was quite different from their apparent 
meanings. These five elements in technical terms are Prthivi (earth), 
Apah (water), Dyau (sky), Agni (Fire) and Vayu (air). We have 
already met three of these elements, Prthivi, Dyau and Vayu in the 
previous chapters. We will discuss the meaning of Agni and Apah
now. 
 
 
 

84: Agni (Fire) 
 

Agni means one that leads. Related word "Agra" in Sanskrit means 
front. Agni is the most important diety after Indra in the Rgveda. Ail 
books except one in the Rgveda start with hymns 

 99



 
 

dedicated to Agni. Sanskrit Agni became Ignis in Latin, Ugnis in 
Lithuanian and Ogni in Slevanic. Agni in scientific terminology is 
"Energy". In Rgveda 2.10.6 Agni is called full of honey. The meaning 
of this mysterious verse will become clear, when we discuss honey 
later in this book. Agni is described as having three forms in the 
Rgveda, and sometimes the other two forms are called brothers of 
Agni. 
 
"Immortals purified three brilliant forms of Agni. Out of them 
one who eats was placed where death is inevitable, other two 
went in sibling spaces." Rgveda 3.2.9 

 
These three forms are Agni, Vayu and Surya. Division of universe 

in three spaces is the basis for three forms of Agni. Agni is called Agni 
in observer space, and this is the space where matter particles take 
birth and die. Agni is called Vayu (field) in intermediate space, and 
field is only another form of energy. Agni is called Surya in light 
space. 

8.2: Apah (Water) 
 
Apah means what pervades, and if there is any confusion as to the 
extent of this pervasion, the Rgveda clears this confusion in the 
following mantras: 
 
"Waters pervade the whole universe, which hold fire in its womb. 
There exists the one lord of all gods, for which god should we 
offer oblation." Rgveda 10.121.7 
 
"Apah held universe in its womb." Rgveda 10.82.6 

 
Apah are everywhere in the world, and there is Agni residing m the 

Apah. As Agni has been identified with energy, Apah is 

 100



 

 

certainly manifestation of energy. To get further insight in the  
concept of Apah,  it is time to recall a mantra from the Satapatha 
Brahmana. 
 
.  "Apah were indeed Salila earlier."  Satapatha Brahmana 11.16 1 

 

Salila has been identified with undifferentiated primordial fluid. So 
what happens when the undifferentiated gets differentiated? There is a 
polarization and formation of opposites. Scientifically Apah is the 
soup of matter-antimatter particles that pervades the universe. Matter 
and antimatter can be considered polarization of energy. When a 
particle meets its anti-particle, it changes into energy. Once Apah is 
identified with matter and anti-matter, energy (Agni) clearly resides in 
it, and a great Vedic ttt puzzle has been solved. Vedas repeatedly 
mention fire residing ii in waters, which apparently makes no sense 
as water is used to ooooo quench fire. Now is the perfect time to read a 
beautiful hymn dedicated to goddess Apah. 

Rgveda 7.49 
Sage: Maitravaruni Vasistha; Deity: Apah; Metre: Tristupa 

 

1. From the middle of Salila, great among seas, purifying Apah keep 
flowing without resting for a moment. Whom bull Indra, who 
holds Vajra, digged to flow, goddess Apah help me here. 

2. Those from heaven or those which flow, those from well or, those 
self-born, those purifying Apah going to sea, goddess Apah help me 
here. 

3. Whose king Varuna moves in the middle observing the truth and 
lies of people, which drips honey, which is clean and pure, goddess 
Apah help me here. 

4. In which king Varuna and Soma are, where all the gods get their , in 
which Vaisvanara Agni has entered, goddess Apah help me here. 

 101



 

In these verses a clear relationship is made between Apah and 
Indra, Varuna, Agni and Soma. We are now in a position to 
understand the relationship between Apah, Indra and Agni, and 
meaning of the rest of the relationship will become clear when I 
discuss Varuna and Soma. 

The Padma Purana, in the twenty fifth chapter of creation canto, 
tells the following story about the dwarf incarnation described earlier. 
Daitya (demon) Vaskali became very powerful because of a boon 
given by Brahma. Indra asked for land from Asuras and 
said,"Brahmana (Visnu) is born in the lineage of Kasyapa. He asked 
me for land equal to three steps, but I do not have anything. Please 
fulfill his desire". Vaskali's priest Sukracarya tried to stop him, but 
Vaskali agreed anyway as there was a custom to never let a 
Brahmana return empty-handed. Visnu put one step in Surya (sun) 
loka, another in Dhruva (fixed) loka, and with his third step he hit the 
cover of the universe. A hole developed in the cover and a profuse 
amount of water gushed in the universe from outside. This water took 
the form of Ganga (Ganges) river and therefore is famous in the 
world as VisnupadI, meaning born out of the feet of Lord Visnu. This 
concept of water gushing in from the outside of universe has been 
borrowed by Semitic religions. The Bible (Genesis 7.11-12, 8.2 and 
Malachi 3.10) talks about the windows of heaven, which God opens 
to let the water from outside gush in. 

The water that Hindu scriptures refer to is not water, but matter 
and antimatter that constitute the universe. Hole in the cover of the 
universe refers to the surface of the universe being broken by the 
expansion of the universe. According to Hindu scriptures when the 
water from outside gushes into the universe, it takes the form of 
Ganga river, which falls on the lock of hair of Lord Siva, and then is 
transferred to earth. For this reason Ganga river is represented as 
coming out of the lock of hair of Lord Siva. To understand the 
science behind this representation, we have to discuss the Rgvedic 
form of Lord Siva, that is Rudra. 

 

 102



 

 

8.3: Rudra 
 

There are three complete hymns dedicated to Rudra in the Rgveda * 
(1.114, 2.33, 7.46). As the universe expands, matter-antimatter is 
created at the surface of the universe. The matter-antimatter then starts 
to travel inside the universe. However matter and antimatter can not 
continue their journey, as they annihilate each % other. As matter and 
antimatter annihilate each other, they change to into radiation. This 
radiation is called Rudra by the Vedic to scientists. Rudra means what 
makes one cry, which refers to penetrating brightness of radiation. 
Earth and heaven together are called Rodasi, meaning crying, 
referring to their being filled up with radiation. 
The concept of Vedic god Rudra later developed in the form of Lord 
Siva in the Puranas. Siva is considered the god of K annihilation, 
which is only appropriate. When particles are annihilated, they 
change into radiation. Lock of hair of Lord Siva is Vayu, as Vayu 
consists of field lines. Lord Siva is very kind, but at times he becomes 
very furious. He has similar attributes in the Vedas. Radiation can be 
soothing or penetrating depending on intensity. In the Rgveda Rudra 
is sometimes used in singular case and sometimes in plural case. It 
seems that the Vedic sages divided radiation in various categories 
depending on intensity, and used singular case when considering 
radiation as a whole or 0 used plural case when considering differing 
intensities of radiation. Bow and arrow is the weapon of Rudra in the 
Rgveda. In the Yajurveda, the character of Rudra develops further.  
Sixteenth chapter of the Yajurveda is called Rudradhyaya, and  
contains beautiful description of Rudra. He is called Sambhu, Sankar 
and Siva, the names by which he is known today. In the Rgveda 
Rudra is not shown assisting Indra, and therefore proponents of the 
Aryan Invasion Theory claim that Rudra was a Dravidian god. They 
conveniently conceal that in the Rgveda sons of Rudra, Marutas, are 
described helping Indra. 

 103



 

8.4: Maruta (wind) 
 
There are twenty nine complete hymns dedicated to Marutas in the 
Rgveda (1.37-39, 1.64, 1.85-88, 1.166, 1.168, 1.172, 2.34, 5.52-
59,6.66,7.56-58,8.7,8.20,8.94,10.77-78). Marutas (winds) are called 
the sons of Rudra (Rgveda 1.64.12). Marutas are seen as helping 
Indra in slaying of Vrtra (Rgveda 1.165.7). You have already seen 
that the slaying of Vrtra is the expansion of the universe. What role 
do Marutas have to play in the expansion. I will illustrate this point 
with the example of a balloon. Consider the balloon as representing 
the universe, and we are considering here the entire balloon not just 
the surface. To expand the balloon, you blow air into it. What does 
the air do? It increases the pressure inside which expands the balloon. 
Now consider the universe which is being filled by radiation as 
matter and antimatter annihilate each other. This radiation creates a 
pressure, radiation pressure, and this radiation pressure expands the 
universe. I will identify Marutas as radiation pressure. As Rudra is 
radiation, and radiation pressure (Marutas) results due to radiation, it 
is only appropriate to call Marutas sons of Rudra. 

Pressure has a very important property. At any point in space, 
pressure is same in all directions. Pressure is a tensor quantity like 
stress. In a three-dimensional space, stress has nine components. Nine 
components arise by squaring of three, the number of dimensions in 
space. If we have a higher dimensional space, number of components 
of stress will simply be square of the number of dimensions. We have 
already seen that Vedic scientists consider inside of universe to be of 
seven dimensions, and therefore pressure will have seven cross seven, 
forty nine components. This is exactly the number of Marutas, forty 
nine and they are also supposed to move in seven rows, each row 
having seven Marutas (Rgveda 5.52.17). Rgveda contains a beauty 
dialogue between Indra and Marutas. Indra sees the Marutas says few 
words in their praise. Marutas become haughty to hear 

 

 104



 

 

that and despise Indra. This makes Indra furious and he starts 
describing his glories. Finally Marutas relent, and accept the 
superiority of Indra. Indra and Marutas then resume their 
friendship.iii 

 Rgveda 1.165 
 Sage: 1,2,4,6,8,10,11,12-Indra, 3,5,7,9-Maruta; 
 Deity: Marutvanindra; Metre: Tristupa 
 

1. Indra: Having same age and same abode, equal in all respect, m 
with which auspicious brilliance do Marutas sprinkle together?  
What is their desire? Where do they come from? Rain producing  
Marutas worship strength to acquire wealth. ||  

2. Indra: Whose hymns of praises do the young ones enjoy. Who 
 turns in non-violent sacrifice? With which great thoughts can I 
 make them happy who move in atmosphere like eagles? 

3. Maruta: O Indra, where do you go alone even though you are 
great? O protector of truthful people, why are you in such a 
condition? Walking together we ask you, owner of horses, 
whatever you want to say, say to us in beautiful words.  

4. Indra: Praises, thoughts and Soma provide me happiness. My 
strength is well known. Praises come to me. Let my two horses 
take me there directly. 

5. Maruta: Therefore we have adorned our bodies with our strength, 
and joined with near ones. We have come to you. O Indra, make 
your strength favorable to us. 

6. Indra: O Marutas, where was your strength, when I was left alone 
to slay the serpent. I am fierce, strong and great. I have killed all 
the enemies. 

7. Maruta: O Bull, you have performed many great deeds, but we 
have also contributed to that by joining forces with you. O mighty 
Indra, we have also done many great acts. Marutas work to  get 
what they desire. 
Indra: O Marutas, I killed Vrtra and became strong on my 

 105



 

own. I hold Vajra in my hand. I have created the flowing waters, 
which give happiness to all. 
9. Maruta: O Maghavan (wealthy), there is nothing that has not 

been instigated by you. There is no other learned god like you. 
0 great Indra, the deeds you have performed and will perform, 
neither anyone else has done it nor will be born to do it. 

10. Indra: Whatever I want to do, I put my mind into it. The vigor 
of me alone spreads in all directions. O Marutas, I am fierce and 
learned. Wherever I go, I become the lord of that place. 

11. Indra: O friend Marutas, the praises you made for me here have 
made me very happy. You have strengthened my body by your 
bodies. You have done it for rain producer, sacrificer Indra. 

12. Indra: O Marutas, be friendly to me the same way. Hold 
praiseworthy wealth and food. Aim for me and cover me with 
glory, O beautiful Marutas. 

 
All Marutas are of same age, none of them is younger or older 
(Verse one). We immediately recognize that this refers to pressure 
being same in all directions. Marutas belong to intermediate space 
(Verse two). Maruta and Vayu both are synonyms, and it is only 
expected that they will belong to intermediate space. Indra killed the 
serpent alone (Verse six). This refers to the initial moments of 
creation. As there was very little matter and energy in the universe 
then, electric force alone was responsible for expansion of the 
universe. Once universe had sufficient matter and energy, then 
Marutas joined hands with Indra to expand the universe. Marutas 
wear gold ornaments on their chests (Rgveda 5.55.1, 5.57.5). This 
refers to Marutas carrying energy with them. In the Rgveda 
characters of Maruta and Vayu are very distinct. Vayu has neither 
been called son of Rudra nor told to be more than one. The Rgveda 
is a book of science, and once we understand this, then we will see 
clearly that different terms in the Rgveda have different scientific 
meanings. The Rgveda is a coded book, and water of the Rgveda 
does not mean water and rivers of the 

 

 106



 

 

Rgveda do not carry water. The most prominent river in the Rgveda 
is SarasvatI, and it is time to discuss the concept of Sarasvati in 
greater detail. 

8.5: Sarasvati 
 

Two complete hymns have been dedicated to Sarasvati in Rgveda  
(7.95 and 7.96). Sarasvati has been worshipped as the goddess of ffff
learning in India. Sarasvati was also a mighty river in India during 
the Vedic age, which dried up later. How did Sarasvati become 
associated with speech and river, two widely different concepts? ! 
The answer lies in the scientific symbolism of the Rgveda, where 
hardly any word means what it is supposed to mean if you consider 
the apparent (rudhi) meaning of the word. On the other hand, every 
word in the Rgveda means exactly what it is supposed to mean, if 
you consider the etymological (yaugika) meaning of the word. 
Speech (Vak) is considered sacred in India and is another form of 
God. The Rgveda itself attests to the equivalence of speech || and God 
in the following verses: 

"All that is bom, is his one fourth, his three fourth is immortal in
heaven." Rgveda 10.90.3 
 

"Three-fourth of Purusa is above, his one fourth is bom again 
j and again." Rgveda 10.90.4 

"Speech has four quarters, which knowledgeable people know.
Three of them are hidden and not known by people. People speak
only the fourth one." Rgveda 1.164.45 

 

The equivalence of Speech and God is described in the Bible 
as well. Is it any wonder that Speech says the following about 
herself in Rgveda 10.125.1? 

 107



 

"I walk with Rudras and Vasus. I live with Adityas and all the gods. 
I hold Mitra and Varuna. I hold Indra, Agni and both 
Asvins." 

 
Sarasvati became the goddess of learning because of her 

association with Speech. The Brahmana texts emphasize this 
aspect again and again. 
 
"Speech is Sarasvati." Satapatha Brahmana 2.5.4.6, 
3.1.4.9,4.2.5.14, Taittiriya Brahmana 1.3.4.5,3.8.11.2, Aitareya 
Brahmana 2.24 

 
Ila, Sarasvati and Bharati form a triad in the Rgveda. Sayana in 

his commentary on Rgveda 1.142.9 places Ila in Prthivi, Sarasvati in 
Antariksa and Bharati in Dyau. This view is further supported by the 
Rgveda itself. In verse 2.30.8 Sarasvati is asked to join with Marutas, 
and Marutas belong to intermediate space. In verse 7.96.2 Sarasvati 
is called friend of Marutas. Pururava is called son of Ila in Rgveda 
10.95.18, and in the same hymn Pururava is depicted as a mortal. 
Death of particles takes place in observer space, so Ila belongs to 
Prthivi. Thus speech (Vak) is the total mass-energy of the universe, 
and Ila, Sarasvati and Bharati are the respective portions of mass-
energy in the observer, intermediate and light spaces. 

There is one important point to be discussed here. Space is 
divided in three, and these three spaces have different volumes, the 
intermediate space having the smallest volume as it is only an 
interface between the observer and light spaces. Another way of 
division is not according to volume, but content. Observer and light 
spaces may have same volume, but there mass-energy contents may 
be vastly different. Confusion arises when these two different 
concepts are equated. Speech has traditionally been divided in three 
categories: Pasyanti representing Bharati, Madhyama representing 
Sarasvati, and Vaikhari representing Ila. 

 

 108



 

Madhyama means intermediate, and thus Sarasvati belonging to 
intermediate space gets further support. However, in Rgveda 
1.164.45 quoted above, Speech is said to have four quarters, and 
confusion runs amok. Sayana in his commentary on this verse adds 
another form of speech called "Para" and brings the total to four. 
Speech (Vak) of the Rgveda has nothing to do with speech, as it 
represents the total mass-energy of the universe. Verses 10.90.3-4 
and 1.164.45 are saying that 75 % of total mass-energy is in the light 
space and only 25 % is in the observer space. In this consideration, 
intermediate space becomes part of light space, as both of them are 
hidden. Intermediate space being only an interface, counting of it as a 
separate phase is optional. When the Rgveda talks about this four-
fold division, it is based on content, and when the Rgveda talks about 
three-fold division it is based on extent. 

Sarasvati has been called fortress of iron in Rgveda 7.95.1. This 
description neither fits Sarasvati as speech nor it fits Sarasvati as a 
river. Some western scholars like Max Muller justify this epithet by 
saying that wide river Sarasvati protected India from invasion. 
However, this justification does not fit well with facts. Western 
boundary of India has traditionally been Indus river and not 
Sarasvati. A large number of cities belonging to the Indus Valley 
Civilization have existed on both sides of Sarasvati. Thus Sarasvati 
could have nourished the Vedic civilization, but not protected it. The 
scientific explanation is that iron represents magnetism everywhere 
in the Rgveda, and as Sarasvati represents the flow of matter and 
energy, it has magnetic properties. 

Now that the relationship of Sarasvati with Speech is clear, it is 
time to discuss the relationship of Sarasvati with river. Sarasvati has 
been called as one having seven sisters in Rgveda 6.61.10. These 
seven sisters are commonly counted as seven rivers of northern India 
and Pakistan. However, there are so many rivers in this region, and 
why would only seven be chosen? Number seven has a special 
significance in the Rgveda as in seven sages, 

 

 109



 

seven enclosures, seven metres, seven cross seven Marutas and so 
on. This will be too much of a coincidence, if there are exactly 
seven rivers as well. Sayana gives a clue when he says that Gayatri 
etc. metres are seven sisters, and similar to them Ganga etc. seven 
rivers are seven sisters. Thus seven sisters of Sarasvati are seven 
dimensions of intermediate space. It is for this reason that Sarasvati 
makes a triad with Ila and Bharati on one hand, and makes a group 
of seven rivers with Ganga, Indus and other rivers on the other 
hand. Universe has three spaces and each space has seven 
dimensions, and Sarasvati forms a group of three or seven 
corresponding to the number of spaces or dimensions. 

In the Rgveda Sarasvati is not a river carrying water. Rgveda 
uses objects familiar to the Vedic people, and uses them in an 
entirely different context. There is little doubt that a river named 
Sarasvati existed during Vedic times, but to try to get further 
information about river Sarasvati from the Rgveda is a futile 
exercise. What the Rgveda has to say about Sarasvati can never 
apply to a river. In Rgveda 7.95.2 Sarasvati is said to flow from 
ocean. The word used is "Samudrat" meaning from ocean, and not 
into. No river on earth does that. Also, Sarasvati is well accepted to 
belong to intermediate space, so she does not flow on earth at all. 
The rivers of the Rgveda are not rivers of water. Matter and energy 
is created at the boundary of the universe, and it starts its journey 
towards the center of the universe. This flow of matter and energy 
is termed rivers in the Rgveda. This representation fits well with 
the code of the Rgveda, as Apah (water) of the Rgveda is in fact 
matter and antimatter. This flow of matter and energy is taking 
place in all three spaces. Matter and energy can be also considered 
to flow along the seven dimensions of each space. Thus total 
number of rivers in the Rgveda becomes twenty one. Here are some 
verses from the Rgveda to support my argument. 
 
"O rivers (Sindhus), you live in three places."    Rgveda 3.56.5 

 

 110



 

"Seven rivers are flowing in heaven." Rgveda 1.72.8 
"We call three times seven flowing rivers."     Rgveda 10.64.8 
"Rivers flow seven by seven in three places."    Rgveda 10.75.1 

 

As I have earlier noted, only three dimensions of our space are 
experienced by us. Rest of the four dimensions are referred to as sub-
directions and described as existing above. Four rivers representing 
these dimensions are also described as existing above in the Rgveda. 
 
 

"Indra filled four rivers flowing above with sweet water." 
Rgveda 1.62.6 

 

Another important point is that all seven dimensions exist at each 
point in space, they just point in different directions. The rivers of the 
Rgveda also originate from same place, flow together, and end up in the 
same place. There is no evidence in the Rgveda to show that seven 
rivers of the Rgveda are separated in space. 
 

"When Vrtra counterattacked, one god Indra became the hair of 
horse. Mighty Indra won the cows, won Soma, and freed seven 
rivers to flow." Rgveda 1.32.12 
 

"Who killed the serpent and made seven rivers flow, who got the cows 
hidden by Bala out, who created Agni between two rocks, who kills 
enemies in wars, he, O people, is Indra." 

Rgveda 2.12.3 
 

These verses show that all seven rivers start their journey from the 
same place, where serpent Vrtra was killed. Sarasvati, Indus and other 
five rivers considered to be belonging to this group of seven rivers do 
not match this description. Consider the 

 

 111



 

following prayer by sage Visvamitra to the rivers Vipata and 
Sutudri. 
 
"Coming forth from the lap of mountains desiring (to go to sea) like 
two joyous horses set free. Like two white cows licking their calves 
Vipata and Sutudri rivers are flowing full of water." 

Rgveda 3.33.1 
 
"Set in motion by Indra you are flowing directly towards ocean like 
charioteers. Moving in accordance to other, with overflowing 
waves, shining, one of you meets the other." 

Rgveda 3.33.2 
 
"I went near best of mothers Sindhu, Like two mothers licking their 
offsprings, they move towards same place. I have come near best of 
mothers Sindhu, I have come near wide lucky Vipata." 

Rgveda 3.33.3 
 
These verses describe the rivers as flowing together without any 

separation. These rivers do not carry water. These rivers represent 
the flow of matter particles. In the next chapter we will take up the 
discussion of fundamental particles as found in the 
Vedas. 

 

 112



 

"These people go in and out all very nicely dressed. 
Do you conclude from this that they swim dressed." 

- Heisenberg 
 

"I have seen an untiring milkman, who travels on converging and diverging
roads near and far away. He stays inside the world dressed up." 

-Rgveda 1.164.31 
 

9. Quark Confinement 

Modern physics tells us that matter and energy can be converted into 
each other, but does not tell us much about the shape of fundamental 
particles and whether there are any stages between the 
transformation of matter particle into energy. Fundamental particles 
are considered point particles which have zero length and volume, 
but possess mass, momentum and charge, thus making the mass-
energy and charge density infinite for the point particles. When a 
property tends to infinity, physicists call it a singularity. Modern 
particle physics is then a mine of moving singularities. Physicists 
dislike singularity, because it is difficult to handle and conceptually
meaningless. They have come up with smart ways to avoid 
singularities, but that can not be considered 

 113



 

a solution. This is the result of modern science reaching the limits of 
detection. These limits have become so obvious that a controversial 
book "The End of Science" has been written[l]. 

However, the approach of modern science is not the only way to 
investigate the ultimate reality. The analytical approach of modern 
science has limitations, and Vedic physics goes beyond these 
limitations as the Vedic scientists have seen whatever can be seen in 
this universe. It is only appropriate that the Vedic scientists gave the 
name Pasu to whatever could be seen. 

9.1: Particle 
 
Pasu is derived from root "Pas" meaning to see. That is why Purusa 
was termed Pasu when he changed his form from unobservable to 
observable. The primary meaning of Pasu is animal. That Pasus are 
related to being observable, and nothing to do whatsoever with 
animals in their intended meaning, is clearly seen in the Satapatha 
Brahmana. 
 
"Prajapati saw Agni in those Pasus, therefore they are called 
Pasus." Satapatha Brahmana 6.2.1.1-4 

 
This mantra also shows explicitly the equivalence of particles 

(Pasus) and energy (Agni). There are several mantras in Vedic 

scriptures to this effect. 

"Agni was Pasu." Yajurveda 23.17 

"Pasus are Agneya." Taittiriya Brahmana 1.1.4.5 

Agneya means having the quality of Agni. Earlier, the reader 
has seen that Maruta are related to radiation. Vedic sages knew 
perfectly well that particles radiated energy 

 

 114



 

"Pasus are Maruta." Aitareya Brahmana 3.19 

"Pasus are Agneya and Maruta."     Jaiminiya Brahmana 2.231 

Maruta means having the quality of Maruta. The 
transformation of matter particles into energy and energy into 
particles is well established by these mantras. 

9.2: Bosons and Fermions 

How did particles originate? The Purusa hymn describes the origin
of particles (Pasus) in the following verse. 

 
"From that Yajna of entire offering coagulated butter (or butter mixed 
with curd) was obtained. Vayavya, Aranya and Gramya animals (Pasu) 
were made." Rgveda 10.90.8 
 

Coagulated butter refers to the universe becoming 
inhomogeneous. In earlier state universe was Salila, completely j. 

homogeneous. With the rise of inhomogeneity, particles were formed. 
Particles can be thought of as condensation of energy. Particles were 
given the name Pasu because they could be seen. Primary meaning of 
Pasu is an animal. Animals have been classified under three 
categories: Gramya, Aranya and Vayavya. Gramya animal means 
those animals which prefer to stay together or domestic animals. 
Grama is a word in Sanskrit which means a village called so because 
people live together there. As opposed to Gramya, Aranya means wild 
animal, derived from Aranya meaning forest Wild animals prefer to 
stay alone. Knowledgeable readers will come to the conclusion that 
Gramya particles are what physicists call bosons and Aranya particles 
are what physicists call fermions. Vayavya means pertaining to Vayu. 
I have already identified Vayu with field, so Vayavya particles 

 

 115



 

can be called field particles. Field particles are related to how particles 
interact with each other. Earlier scientists believed in the principle of 
action at a distance. Particles just interacted with each other without 
any intermediary and interaction was instantaneous. Newton was the 
champion of this school of thought. Later scientists hypothesized that 
particles interacted with an intermediary called field. Interaction is not 
instantaneous and the highest speed of interaction is the velocity of 
light. Einstein was the champion of this school of thought. Scientists in 
last few decades have come up with the idea of field particles, and 
under this concept particles interact via the exchange of field particles. 
Electromagnetic interaction takes place by the exchange of photons. It 
is evident that the Vedic scientists considered field to act via field 
particles and knew five thousand years ago what scientists are 
beginning to realize only now. 

Gramya particles are further divided in four types: Aja meaning 
goat, Avi meaning sheep, Asva meaning horse and Gau meaning cow. 
This is again described in the Purusa hymn. 
 
"From that horses were born, who have teeth on both sides. From that 
cows were born, from that goats and sheep were born." 

Rgveda 10.90.10 
 
It is important to note here that only these four domestic animals 

find repeated mention in the Rgveda. Cat, for example, is not 
mentioned in the Vedas. Cows are hidden in the mountains, horses 
drive the chariot of the gods, wool of sheep is used to strain Soma 
juice and goat is the vehicle of Pusa. All of these have a precise 
scientific meaning. The choice of these four animals to represent four 
Gramya particles is not arbitrary, which will become evident soon. 
Aja means not born. Sometimes Aja is also referred to as Ekaja 
meaning once-born. Aja is the intermediate step between the 
transformation of energy into particle. I will translate Aja as localized 
energy. Aja is almost 

 

 116



 

like energy, and that is why it was given the name not-born,  however 
some change has taken place which could not escape the attention of 
the Vedic scientists. You should recall that energy is considered 
immortal in Vedic science, and therefore not-born. "Aja then 
transforms into Avi, Asva or Gau particle. As Avi, Asva or Gau 
particle are born from Aja, these three particles can be considered 
twice-born with Aja being considered once-born. The confusion 
between animals and particles gave rise to a hierarchical division of 
Hindu society. 

 

9.3: Once-born and Twice-born 
i 
Hindu society is divided in four classes (Varna): Brahmana, Ksatriya, 
Vaisya and Sudra. This division existed in Vedic age, which is evident 
from the reference to these Varnas in the Purusa hymn. However, 
Varna system was not based on birth in Vedic age. In post-vedic times, 
four Varnas became representative of four Gramya animals. Brahmana 
became representative of cow (Gau), Ksatriya became representative 
of horse (Asva), Vaisya became representative of sheep (Avi) and 
Sudra became representative of goat (Aja). This representation, though 
not unique, is very well accepted in post-vedic literature. Satapatha 
Brahmana 13.2.2.15 says that horse is Ksatriya. It also says that cow 
was born from the mouth of Prajapati (12.7.1.4), and the Purusa hymn 
says that Brahmana was bom from the mouth of Purusa (Rgveda 
10.90.12). Thus cow became representative of Brahmana. The Vedas 
ban the killing of cows. It is for this reason that killing of cow or 
Brahmana became the greatest sin in post-vedic Hinduism. Once these 
identifications gained ground, Sudra became once-born and rest of the 
three Varnas became twice bom. Second birth commenced with the rite 
of Upanayana and study of the Vedas was taken up only after 
Upanayana. As Sudras were deprived the rite of Upanayana because 
now they were not  

 117



 

twice-born, they also lost the right to study Vedas. This was one 
of the most unfortunate development in Hindu society and Hindus 
have paid a very heavy price for this institutionalized inequality. 
If a corrective step is not taken today, this inequality may finish 
Hinduism altogether. 

9.4: The Flying Horse 

Avi (sheep) particle is given this name, because this particle 
closely resembles field. Sheeps are covered with wool, and 
similarly Avi particles are covered with dense field lines. Soma is 
repeatedly described as being strained through sheep's wool in the 
Rgveda, which means the passage of Soma through field lines of 
Avi particle. 

Asva (horse) particle is given this name because of the fast 
speed of horse. Asva is often described in the Rgveda as travelling 
faster than thoughts. Gau (cow) particle gets its name because it 
emits radiation like cow gives milk. These particles could not have 
meant animals by any stretch of imagination is obvious from even 
a cursory reading of the Rgveda. I am translating here a full hymn 
dedicated to Asva particle to show that Asva does not mean horse 
in the Vedas. 

Rgveda 1.163 
Sage: Dirghatama Aucathya; Deity: Asva; Metre: Tristupa 

 
1. When you roared springing from sea or land after birth, your 

great birth is worthy of praise. You have wings of eagle and arms 
of deer. 

2. This horse was given by Yama, Trita harnessed it, Indra 
captured him first, and Gandharva held its reins. Vasus made this 
horse from sun. 

3. You are Yama, you are Aditya, you are Trita by a hidden act, 
 

 118



 

 
you are well associated with Soma. You have three bindings in heaven, 

it is said.  
4. You have three bindings in heaven, you have three bindings in 

waters, you have three bindings in sea. Tell me, Varuna, where was 
your most excellent birth. 

5. O horse, these are your purifying regions, these are 
impressions of your feet related to sacrifice. Here I have seen 
your auspicious reins, which protect universal law. 

6. I recognize your soul in my mind from faraway coming down
from heaven like a flying bird. I have seen your head going through 
easy to travel roads without dust like a bird. 

7. I have seen your beautiful form eager to eat food in cow's 
foot, (here cow's foot is normally translated place of earth as 
earth is one of the meanings of cow in post-vedic litearature). When 
your mortals received the enjoyment, then you greedy ate  the 
herbs. 

8. O horse, chariot follows you, men follow you, cows follow you, luck 
of young ladies follows you. Those following the laws follow you 
desiring your friendship. Gods follow you measuring your strength. 

9. His horns are golden, his feet are of iron, he is faster than mind and 
even Indra, who first mounted him, was lower than him. Gods 
come to partake his oblation. 

10. The horses are full-haunched, slender-waisted, fiery, heavenly
courser. When they travel along the heavenly path, they move in 
rows like swans. 

11. O horse, your body is made for flying, your mind is rapid as wind. 
Your beautiful horns are placed in various ways and travel in 
forests. 

12. Strong horse goes for slaughtering meditating upon the gods. His 
navel goat is led ahead, praisers and poets follow him.  

13. The horse goes directly to his father and mother in the most 
excellent place. Go to the gods happily today. May the donors 
receive wealth. 

 119



 

This certainly is no ordinary horse. Either the sages were drunk as 
modern historians tell us, or they are describing what Asva particle is 
precisely. The picture certainly is of a flying horse. Flying is referred 
explicitly in verse six, ten and eleven. In verse one wings are 
mentioned. Flying will apply exactly to a fundamental particle. In 
verse two and three Asva particle is associated with Trita. Trita 
became King Triton in Greek mythology. Trita is referred to as a king 
in the Rgveda as well. Trita means one third, and was given this 
name because Trita refers to one third electric charge. I will identify 
Asva as one of the quark particles. Modern scientists have very 
recently found that quarks carry one third electric charge only. An 
electron or a proton carries one unit charge. Verse three tells that 
Asva is Trita by a hidden act. Vedic sages clearly know that quarks 
can not be observed in isolation, that there actual form is always 
hidden. Calling Asva by the name Trita means that Asva particle 
carries one third charge. Verse twelve and thirteen apparently 
describe horse sacrifice. This is not an actual sacrifice, but the 
transformation of Asva particle in energy, and that is why horse 
(Asva) is supposed to go to gods (energy). In verse twelve Aja is 
called the navel of Asva particle. Navel means center, and here it 
denotes the fact that Asva particle is made from Aja. Goat is said to 
be led ahead of horse in the sacrifice. Scientifically, this signifies that 
before transformation into energy Asva particle becomes Aja. Thus 
the process of transformation in the Vedas is from energy to Aja, and 
Aja to particles, and then back to Aja, and Aja to energy. This 
process of creation and annihilation of particles carries on 
continuously. 

The horns of horse are referred in verses nine and eleven. Horns 
are golden signifying that particles can be transformed into energy. 
Horses don't have horns and therefore horns are translated as ear or 
mane, but the word used in the Rgveda is Srnga, which means horn 
and not ear or mane. This description was deliberate to distinguish 
Asva particle from animal horse, as 

 

 120



 

 

a very poor fate awaited the animal. Vedic literature talks about the 
sacrifice of Gramya animals (cow, horse, goat and sheep), and any 
confusion between apparent and intended meaning would bring 
horrible cruelty to these animals. Despite the best efforts as; of the 
Vedic scientists the horrible practice of animal sacrifice gained 
ground. 
 

9.5: Animal Sacrifice 
 
 Particle physics is a branch of modem physics that has fascinated both 
layman and experts in this century by the extraordinary, discoveries. 
Particle physics interests all of us because it is about knowing what the 
universe is made of, and might someday explain what our 
consciousness is made of, what makes us aware. Particle ', physics 
owes its beginning to John Dalton, who in 1808 proposed j the atomic 
theory of matter. According to his theory matter was composed of 
atoms. Atoms of an element combined with atoms 

of another element to form compounds. Towards the end of  
nineteenth century, J. J. Thomson discovered electron, one of the 
building block of atoms. The discovery of other two building to blocks 
of atom, proton and neutron, took another thirty five years. With the 
discovery of neutron in 1932, a nice and perfect picture of atomic 
world consisting of electron, proton and neutron emerged. However, 
soon this picture was shattered with the discovery of a number of new 
sub-atomic particles. Particle physicists continued to discover new 
particles, and soon their number reached more than hundred. The 
picture started to grow complex instead of becoming simple. Were all 
of them fundamental particles or even these particles were made of 
smaller building blocks. These particles are categorized in bosons, 
living together, and fermions, living alone. Fermions are further 
divided in two groups, baryons, which are affected by strong force, 
and leptons, which are not affected by strong force. Similarly bosons 

 121



 

are further divided in two groups: mesons, which are affected by 
strong force, and intermediate bosons, also called gauge bosons, 
which are not affected by strong force. Proton and neutron are 
baryons, electron and neutrinos are leptons, and photon is gauge 
boson. Baryons and mesons, both of them affected by strong force, 
are collectively called hadrons. In 1964 scientists M. Gell-Mann and 
George Zweig proposed that hadrons were made up of three 
fundamental particles. These particles were given the name quarks, 
and later their number rose to six with the discovery of new particles. 
There is something very strange about quarks. They don't exist by 
themselves. They are always combined with other quarks. Efforts to 
isolate the quarks are futile, because to break quarks, they need to be 
bombarded with high-speed particles and the energy of these particles 
is transformed into making quarks. Quarks can be thought as ends of a 
string, if you cut the string, you make two new ends again. Gramya 
Pasus can be identified with quarks. They can not exist alone. They 
are always in a form different from what they actually are. In effect 
their actual form has been sacrificed. Modern physicists call this 
phenomenon "quark confinement" and Vedic scientists called this 
phenomenon "Pasumedha" meaning animal sacrifice. The sacrifice in 
Vedic science means a change of form, and has nothing to do with 
actual human or animal sacrifice. For this reason, in the Rgveda, 
Yajna has been called Adhvara at several places. Adhvara means 
without violence, and actual animal sacrifice can not be performed 
without violence. As we saw earlier for the reason that humans or 
animals may not be sacrificed by confusion with Purusamedha, Vedic 
scientists allowed the depiction of the Purusa animal only as a
mythical unicorn. What could they do to prohibit animal sacrifice? 
The Indus Valley Civilization was spread over a large area, and 
animal sacrifice could take place in remote areas. Cruelty to animals 
was unacceptable to Vedic scientists having reached such a high level 
of intelligence, and therefore they took a very extreme step. They 
completely banned the depiction of Gramya animals, 

 

 122



 

I   cow, horse, goat and sheep. This is the reason there are no figures 
found of these four animals in any seals of the Indus Valley 
Civilization. The absence of horse depiction was noted by the 
proponents of the Aryan Invasion Theory. They tried to prove 
mat horse was not known in the Indus Valley Civilization and it was 
brought into India by invading Aryans. Now we know the actual reason 
for this. 

We should note that only quarks are always dressed, other 
fundamental particles like leptons can be isolated to be observed 
naked. Similarly only Gramya animals are sacrificed, Vayavya and 
Aranya animals are not sacrificed. 

9.6: Quarks 
 

There is an interesting story about the creation of charged particles in 
Satapatha Brahmana 1.2.3.1-2. 
 

"Agni was earlier of four types. First one chosen for sacrifice fled. 
Second and third also fled. Then Agni we know hid inside water, but 
gods found him and took him out of water forcefully. Agni spitted on 
waters saying you could not provide me protection. From that three 
Aptya gods came out - Ekata, Dvita and Trita. 
They started living with Indra." 
 

 First three Agnis represent the 75% of mass-energy in light 
space. Fourth Agni is the 25% of mass-energy in the observer 
space. Hiding of Agni in water represents the equivalence of 
matter and energy. Second part describes the formation of charged 
particles. Ekata means one, Dvita means two third and Trita means one 
third. These refer to particles carrying unit, two third and 
one third charge. Their description Aptya means electrically charged. 
Finally staying with Indra means these particles give rise to electrical 
force as they are electrically charged. 

 

 123



 

Quarks are six, and each quark has three variations making the total 
eighteen. These variations are given the name color by scientists, and 
quarks are said to have three colors. It is amazing that Vedic scientists 
also came up with the same idea of color to distinguish Gramya 
particles. 
 
"Indra creates white milk in black and red cows." 

Rgveda 1.62.9
 
"Two horses, black, red or white, draw the chariot of Agni." 

Rgveda 2.10.2
 
In Svetasvatara Upanisad 4.5 Aja is said to be of three colors red, 

white and black creating various objects of its own form. In Maitrayani 
Samhita 4.5.7 Avi is said to be of three colors red, white and black. 
However, there are important differences between quarks and Gramya 
particles. Quarks are six and Gramya particles are only four. Also, all 
quarks are considered fundamental, while three Gramya particles Gau, 
Asva and Avi are said to be derived from Aja particle. This means that 
further simplification in the quark model will arise as scientists dig 
deeper into the properties of quarks. The Satapatha Brahmana clearly 
states that other particles are formed from Aja particle. 
 
"Aja is the form of all animals."   Satapatha Brahmana 6.5.1.4 

 
Aja being the intermediate step in the transformation of energy into 

particles and particles into energy, this mantra makes perfect sense. 
Following mantras from the Vedas support this viewpoint. 
 
"Aja is Agni." Atharvaveda 9.5.7 
 
"Aja was born from perturbation (Soka) of Agni." 

Atharvaveda 9.5.13 

 

 124



 

Aja was born from perturbation (Soka) of Agni and he saw Agni 
first and gods became gods due to Aja." 

Yajurveda 13.51, Atharvaveda4.14.1 
 

These mantras very well illustrate that Aja is more like energy than 
particle. Aja has been described as having only one foot (ekapada) in 
scriptures (Rgveda 7.35.13, Satapatha Brahmana 8.2.4.1). I have never 
encountered a goat having only one foot. This again is further proof of 
Aja being an intermediate step between transformation of energy into 
particle. Once the particle form has completely manifested, then this 
manifestation is referred to as an animal having four feet. In the 
Yajurveda following question is raised. 

"What object is Pilippila and what object is Pisangila?" 
 Yajurveda 23.11
 

Pilippila is something that is very soft and presses very easily, Pisangila means devourer. The answer is given in the next mantra.
"Avi is Pilippila and night is Pisangila?"       Yajurveda 23.12 

However, the inquirer is still curious and asks the question again 
to get a very definite answer. Then he receives the following answer. 
 

"Aja is Pisangila, who like a dog gets things out and devours it 
again." Yajurveda 23.56 

 

Here we find that Vedic scientists could not only observe the 
Gramya particles, but measure their properties as well. Avi particle is 
considered a soft particle because it has dense field-lines coming out 
of it. Total number of fundamental particles is considered eight in 
Jaiminiya Brahmana. 

 

 125



 

"There are eight Pasus." Jaiminiya Brahmana 3.318 
 
Obviously the sages could not be talking about animals, as they 

could easily count more than eight kind of animals around them. Eight 
animals refer to eight-fold division of fundamental particles known to 
particle physicists. 
 
 
 
9.7: The Sacred Cow 
 
The Rgveda is the celebration of the manifestation of universe. It 
describes the evolution of the cosmos as it has happened. The sages 
want the universe to form, because without universe you and I can not 
be there. They are happy when forces of expansion win the war over 
forces of contraction, because without expansion of the universe, there 
will be no universe. One of the fundamental particles that plays a very 
critical role in the expansion of the universe is Gau particle, and it is 
no wonder that cow became a sacred animal in Hinduism. 

There are two complete hymns dedicated to Gau in the Rgveda 
(10.169 and 6.28). Two verses in hymn 6.28 are dedicated to Gau as 
well as Indra. Rgveda 10.19 is dedicated to Gau or Apah, and Rgveda 
4.58 to Gau or Agni or Surya or Ghrta. 

To a non-Hindu it is very difficult to understand why the cow is 
considered sacred by Hindus. Hindus do not eat beef, because they 
consider cow as mother, who nourishes us by her milk. This is the 
traditional justification. As most Hindu beliefs, the origin of this belief 
can also be traced back to the Vedas, which clearly have very high 
respect for cow. One of the adjectives for cow in Vedas is aghnya 
meaning not to be killed. One verse from the Rgveda says: 

Cow is the mother of Rudras, daughter of Vasus, sister of Adityas,
and should not be killed." Rgveda g.101.15 

 

 126



 

 

That the cow should not be killed is repeated several times in .   
the Vedas. However, Vedic literature talks of cow-sacrifice along  
with horse, goat and sheep sacrifice. The sacrifice refers to Gramya 
particles not existing in their actual forms. As the chances of 
confusion of these particles with animals were extremely great, sages
specifically referred to cow as aghnya. Sages took extreme precaution 
in dealing with the concept of Purusa and Gramya animals, as any 
wrong interpretation could have resulted in human or animal sacrifice. 
There are several verses in the Rgveda, where Gau can not be 
confused with cow animal. In post-vedic period ii as the real 
meaning of Gau was forgotten, additional meanings of word Gau were 
invented to make sense of the Vedic verses. Where Gau of sun is 
mentioned (Rgveda 7.36.1), Gau is interpreted to mean sun's rays. 
Where Gau is said to be mixed with Soma (Rgveda 9.10.3), Gau is 
interpreted as cow's milk. In all such descriptions, Gau means Gau 
particle, and its scientific meaning can be understood without taking 
recourse to secondary meanings of word Gau. Cows having one, two, 
four, eight or nine legs are mentioned in Rgveda 1.164.41. Cow has 
been called astakarni, having eight ears, in Rgveda 10.62.7. These 
verses are not describing ordinary cow animal, but they are describing 
Gau particle. Scientific meaning of these verses will become clear, 
when science reaches the capability of observing Gau particle in 
greater detail. Kausltaki Brahmana 12.1 says that "Apo vai " 
dhenavah" meaning waters are indeed cows. Why would anyone I 
write something like this? This is not the result of drinking too much 
Soma juice, rather it has a precise meaning. This is neither about 
water nor about cows, they are just symbols. Scientific meaning is that 
Gau particles are one form of matter particles, in Vedic cosmology 
Gau particle has a very special place. initially Universe is a complete 
void without space, matter and energy. The expansion of universe is 
not a smooth affair to begin with as the forces of expansion and 
contraction are delicately balanced. As the universe starts to expand, 
the creation of matter 

 127



 

 

and energy begins. This creation takes place at the surface of the 
universe. There is an energy barrier for this process to take place, and 
therefore the surface of the universe is given the name mountain by 
the Vedic sages. Gau particles, along with other particles, are 
produced at the surface of the universe. For this reason cows are said 
to be hiding in mountains in the Rgveda. According to Rgveda 
10.67.4-5, Brhaspati opened three doors and freed cows. These three 
doors are the endpoints of the observer, intermediate and light 
spaces. As Gau particles are charged particles, remember that they 
have been identified with quarks having fractional charge, they 
produce electric force, Indra, and contribute to the expansion of 
universe. For this reason Indra is called to be protector of cows. Once 
the process has stabilized, the expansion of universe continues along 
with the creation of matter and energy. In the Vedas, sages are 
always asking for cows, horses and wealth. They are not asking for 
personal wealth, but they are asking for space, matter and energy in a 
universe without it, so that one day we human beings could exist. It 
is because of the role played by Gau particle in our existence that 
Cow is considered sacred. In ancient India wealth of a person was 
measured by the number of cows possessed by that person. This 
happened because the cow is described as wealth repeatedly in the 
Rgveda(1.33.1,5.52.17,5.57.7,5.79.7,6.44.12,7.67.9,7.77.5, 
7.92.3,7.94.9). Atharvaveda 18.1.32 says that cow holds the earth. 
This verse describes the role of Gau particle in keeping the observer 
space separated from the light space. In the Puranas, earth sometimes 
takes the shape of a cow, which is a representation of verses like this 
from the Vedas. Rgveda 10.46.3 says that Trita found Agni on the 
head of cow, which means that Gau particle possesses one third 
fractional charge and that particle can be transformed into energy. 
Transformation of matter into energy and energy into matter is well
accepted in Vedas, and this transformation is the subject of 
discussion in the next chapter. 

 128



 

'All particles of matter and energy are but different harmonies of strings. 
- Sylvester James Gates 

 

10. Matter and Energy 

 

Vedic physics and modern physics both tell us that there is a 
continuous dance of creation and annihilation of particles everywhere 
in the universe. Behind the scene, matter particles transform into 
energy and energy transforms into particles. The Vedas describe this 
dance as follows. Energy changes into Aja, Aja into matter particles, 
particles into Aja, and Aja back into energy. This creation-
annihilation energy has a very special place in the cosmology of the 
Rgveda, and the Vedic sages gave it the name of God Savita. 

10.1: Savita 
Savita is derived from root "su" meaning to procreate. Word 
“Prasava” from the same root means to give birth. As energy to 
matter particles, name Savita could not be more appropriate. Nirukta 
10.31 says that Savita gives birth to all. 

 129



 

There are ten complete hymns dedicated to Savita (Rgveda 
1.35,2.38,4.53,4.54,5.81, 5.82,6.71,7.38,7.45,10.149)'. There are 
twelve more mantras dedicated to Savita in other hymns (Rgveda 
1.22.5-8, 1.24.3-4, 3.62.10-12, 10.139.1-3), and there are few more 
mantras in which he has been invoked together with other gods 
(Rgveda 1.24.5,1.35.1,7.38.6,9.67.25,9.67.26). God Savita is very 
special to the Vedic sages. They describe him in most beautiful 
words. The most sacred mantra of the Rgveda, Gayatri mantra, is 
dedicated to God Savita. 
 
"Tatsaviturvarenyam bhargo devasya dhimahi, dhiyo yo nah
prachodayat." Rgveda 3.62.10 

meaning, 

"Let's meditate on that brilliant radiance of God Savita. May he 
provide inspiration to our intellect." 

 
To provide inspiration is the distinctive feature of Savita. Here is 

a beautiful hymn dedicated to God Savita. 
 

Rgveda 1.35 Sage: Hiranyastupa Angirasa; Deity: 
Savita; Metre: 1,9: Jagati, Rest: Tristupa 

 
1. I invoke Agni first for well-being, I invoke Mitra and Varuna 
for help, I invoke night (Ratri) giving rest to the world, I invoke 
god Savita for help. 
2. Moving in dark atmosphere, placing immortals and mortals in 
their respective places, god Savita comes on a golden chariot 
observing the universe. 
3. He goes by high-lying or low-lying ways, adorable travels by two 
bright horses. God Savita comes from faraway driving away all evil. 

 

 130



 

5. Covered with gold, having many shapes, bearing dark atmosphere, 
adorable Savita having beautiful brightness is riding on the chariot with 
golden axle. 
6. His horses, which are dark in color but have white legs, carrying the 
chariot with golden front have seen the people well. Whole world and 
all people are always situated near god Savita. 
7. There are three heavens, two of them are near Savita, in one Yama 
has his beautiful palace. As the chariot rests on the pin of the axle, 
immortals on Savita, one who knows this, come and tell us here. 
8. The bird with beautiful wings has seen the atmospheres well. He is 
lifegiver, gives good guidance and deeply excited. Where is sun now, 
who knows? In which heaven its rays have spread? 
9. He has seen the eight summits of earth, three joint regions and 
seven seas. God Savita having golden eyes has come giving precious 
gems to worshipper. 
10. Savita having golden hands travels between both earth and heaven 
observing all. He removes diseases, instigates sun and pervades in 
heaven from dark atmosphere. 
11. Having golden hands, lifegiver, giving good guidance, giving 
pleasure, self-supported Savita come here. Praised Savita takes his 
place every night driving away demons and evil spirits. 
12. O Savita, the dustless roads, you had earlier, well-made in 
atmosphere, today protect us by those easy to travel roads, speak in our 
favor. 

God Savita has golden chariot (verse 2), his chariot has golden axle 
(verse 4) and his chariot has golden front (verse 5). Savita has golden 
hands (verse 10) and golden eyes (verse 8). Savita also has golden 
tongue (Rgveda 6.71.3). Thus Savita and gold are very intimately 
connected. As gold is the color of energy in Vedic science, mere is an 
exact match between the description of God Savita and his 
identification with creation-annihilation energy. Scientists are well 
aware of the laws governing 

 

 131



 

transformation of energy. The Vedic sages are also well aware of 
these laws, when they say the following about the laws of Savita. 
 
"Whose laws can not be violated by Indra, Varuna, Mitra, Aryama 
and Rudra, whose laws can not be broken by any enemy, I invoke 
that God Savita by praises for good fortune."     Rgveda 2.38.9 

 
In post-vedic times Savita became identical with Surya (sun). 

However, in the Rgveda, Savita and Surya are as distinct as they can 
be. Surya is not described as golden like Savita. Surya is time and 
again mentioned as residing in heaven, whereas Savita resides in 
atmosphere. In Rgveda 1.35.9 Savita is said to instigate Surya. Savita 
is said to join with rays of Surya in Rgveda 5.81.4. In Rgveda 
1.123.3 Savita and Surya both are mentioned. Thus Savita is very 
distinct from Surya, and this distinction will become very clear when 
identification of Surya is taken up in a later chapter. For now, we will 
devote some time discussing another prominent Vedic God closely 
related with Savita, but forgotten in a later age, namely Pusa. 
 
 
 
10.2: Pusa 
 
There are eight complete hymns dedicated to Pusa in the Rgveda 
(1.42, 1.138, 6.53, 6.54, 6.55, 6.56, 6.58, 10.26). There are fourteen 
other mantras dedicated to Pusa (Rgveda 1.23.13-15, 3.62.7-
9,6.48.16-19,10.17.3-6). In two hymns and four mantras Pusa has 
been invoked with other gods (Rgveda 2.40,6.57,8.4.15-18). Pusa 
means nourisher and is derived from root "Pus" meaning to nourish. 
Pusa is intimately connected with animals as seen from the 
following mantra: 

"Animals are Pusa, nourishment is Pusa, nourishment is animals" Satapatha 
Brahmana 3.1.4.9 

 

 132



 

Pusa is called the guardian of animals (Pasupa) in Rgveda 6.58.2. 
Taittiriya Samhita 1.5.1.3 says that Pusa is the master of animals. As 
animals are particles, Pusa can be identified as "set of particles". All 
the particles are collectively termed Pusa. There are eight hymns 
dedicated to Pusa, because of the eightfold division of fundamental 
particles. The eightfold way of classifying fundamental particles was 
proposed by Murray Gell-Mann and Yuval Ne'eman in 1961[1]. The 
name "eightfold way" was suggested by association with the eightfold 
way of Buddhism. In 

Rgveda 6.58.1 Pusa is said to have two forms, one black and other 
white. White form is that of particle and black form is that of anti-
particle. Here is a beautiful hymn dedicated to Pusa. 
 Rgveda 6.54 
  Sage: Barhaspatya Bhardvaja; Deity Pusa, Metre: Gayatri 
 

1. O Pusa, take us to the wise person, who shows us straight path,        
who tells emphatically that this is (our lost wealth). 
2. Let's join with Pusa, who shows the way to our homes, who 
says that this is. 
3. The wheel of Pusa never gets damaged, seat on his chariot 
never falls, felly of his wheel never wavers. 
4. Pusa never forgets him, who pays oblation to Pusa. He 
receives wealth first. 
5. Let Pusa walk behind our cows, let Pusa protect our horses, let 
Pusa give us grains. 
6. O Pusa, walk behind the cows of us praisers and sacrificers, 
who are extracting juice of Soma. 
7. Let none of them get lost, let none of them get hurt, let none of 
them fall in pits. Come to us with unhurt cows. 
8. We ask for wealth from Lord Pusa, who hears our praises, 
who is careful and whose wealth is never lost. 

 9. O Pusa, let's abide by your laws, and never get hurt, we sing 
 

 133



 

 

10. Let Pusa hold his right hand very far away, and bring back our 
lost animals. 

 
In verse three wheel of Pusa is mentioned, which represents the 

spin of the particles. Pusa is the master of great riches in Rgveda 
6.55.2. This makes perfect sense as particles are the wealth of the 
universe. Relationship of Pusa with Savita is described by the 
following verses in the Vedas: 

"Savita instigates Pusa for movement."        Rgveda 10.139.1 

"Pusa moves by inspiration of Savita." Yajurveda 17.58 

"Savita becomes Pusa by his movement."        Rgveda 5.81.5 
 
These verses establish that when energy (Savita) transforms into 

particles, it is called Pusa. Pusa is called Ajasva in Rgveda 1.138.4, 
6.55.3 and 6.58.2. Ajasva is made by joining of words Aja meaning 
goat and Asva meaning horse. Ajasva means one whose goats do 
the work of horses. Following verses do not leave any doubt about 
the work goats do for Pusa. 
 
"The chariot of Pusa is drawn by Aja." 

Rgveda 6.55.6,6.57.3,10.26.8 
 
The reader should recall that Aja has been earlier described as 

the intermediate stage between the transformation of energy into 
matter particles. For this reason Aja is said to drive the chariot of 
Pusa. 

 
The process of creation and annihilation of particles can now be 

described as following: 
 
Savita    -»    Aja    -»     Pusa    -»    Aja    -»   Savita 

 134



 

 

In Brahmanas, like many other gods Pusa also became one of the 
names of sun. However, description of Pusa in the Rgveda,   can not 
be that of sun by any stretch of imagination. In Rgveda . 6.56.3 Pusa is 
described as rotating the golden wheel of sun. In Rgveda 6.58.3 Pusa 
is said to be the messenger of sun. Importance of Pusa gradually 
decreased after the Vedic age and in the Puranas 
he hardly gets any mention. His main job as the keeper of animals 

was assigned to Siva, and as Siva is currently worshipped by 
Hindus all over the world, historians were quick to identify the 

seal of Pusa as that of Siva, Lord of the animals. 
 
 

10.3: Lord of the Animals 
 
Figure 10.1 shows Pusa, Lord of the animals. This figure is widely 
recognized as that of representing an earlier form of Siva, and has 
been given the name Proto-Siva. This identification is jjjj 
completely wrong. The figure has no resemblance to that of Siva. 
There is no Trisula, the weapon of Siva, there is no Nandi Bull, who 
accompanies Siva, there is no moon on the forehead, there is no 
Ganga river flowing from his lock of hair. Only reason this figure has 
been identified with Siva, is that Siva is called Lord of the animals, 
and there are several animal figures surrounding the central figure. 
However, this can not be considered a clinching evidence, because 
there is a god in the Rgveda, Pusa, who is explicitly referred to as 
Lord of the animals. Siva is not even K mentioned in the Rgveda, 
because Siva is a later concept that has 
formed by the amalgamation of the Rgvedic gods Pusa and Rudra. 
My contention is that from the Rgveda to the Brahmanas to the 
Puranas we have a complete description of the evolution of Hinduism 
and history of India, and there is absolutely no need to f take recourse 
to vague prefixes like "Proto". Our ancestors believed in learning, 
they have kept records assiduously, and they have left us enough 
material to construct our history right from 

 135



 

 

Figure 10.1: Pusa, Lord of the animals, a 
seal from Mohenjo-daro (M-304) 

 136



 

 

the Indus Valley Civilization to the present day. All we need to do is to 
use logical reasoning without bias, be objective, and separate science 
from mythology and mythology from history. Proto-Siva, Proto-Sanskrit, 
Proto-Indo-European language, all these are purely speculative concepts. 
Sanskrit is the mother of all languages in Indo-European family, and 
there was never any language called Proto-Sanskrit. 

We have already seen that there was a complete ban on the depiction 
of horse, cow, sheep and goat, and therefore these animals are not shown 
in the figure. There is an animal figure below the central figure, which 
looks like a deer. In the Rgveda goat is repeatedly said to be the vehicle 
of Pusa, and if depiction of goat was banned, deer could be considered a 
natural replacement. Central figure wears a headgear in the seal, and 
Pusa is described as wearing headgear in Rgveda 6.55.2. As the Rgveda 
forms the basis of understanding the Indus Valley Civilization, it is only 
logical to identify the central figure with that of Pusa. 

Savita and Pusa represent energy and matter particles in the Rgveda. 
You might be wondering what are the Vedic counterparts of electron, 
proton and neutron, the building blocks of atoms. Is there a similar triad 
in Vedas? It is time to find out. 

 137



 
 

 138



 

"If Christianity was somehow stopped at its birth, 
whole world would be following Mithraism today." 

- Ernest Renan 
 

11. Electron, Proton and Neutron 

History of India as known today has been written by foreigners. 
Native history of India is completely opposite to the history of India 
compiled by foreigners. Foreigners were not interested in writing an 
objective history of India, because they were serving their ideological 
masters. Foreigners were not satisfied by merely dividing Indians 
using pseudo-history, but they divided our gods also on racial lines. 
Hindus have never discriminated against people based on their color. 
Hindus worship God Krsna and Goddess Kali. Both, Krsna and Kali, 
mean black and are depicted as such as well. Foreigners have created a 
mess by dividing Gods along Aryan and Dravidian lines. All this is 
pure rubbish, as India was never invaded by Aryans. One of the gods 
in the Vedic pantheon supposed to have been borrowed from Dravidians 
in the Indus Valley is god Varuna. 

 139



 

11.1: Varuna 
 
Varuna is made from root "Vr" and means one who covers. 
Nirukta 10.4 says that Varuna is called so because he covers. 
Gopatha Brahmana 1.7 also provides similar derivation. We have 
already met two other words with same etymological meaning, 
Vrtra and Varaha. Vrtra and Varaha cover the universe, what 
could Varuna possibly cover? To find the answer, we have to 
delve deep in the Vedic concept of Varuna. Let's start by going 
through a beautiful hymn dedicated to Varuna in the Rgveda. 

 
Rgveda 5.85 Sage: Bhaumatri; Deity: Varuna; 

Metre: Tristupa 

1. Praise supreme ruler Varuna by great, deep and endearing 
prayer. He expanded earth for sun like a hunter kills for skin. 
2. Varuna expanded atmosphere in forests. He strengthened the 
horses, put milk in cows, gave desire to work in hearts, 
established Agni in waters and sun in heaven. He created Soma 
on mountains. 
3. Varuna turned the mouth of big barrel of water downwards for 
earth, atmosphere and heaven and freed it. From that, the king of 
whole universe makes the soil fertile like rains nourish the grains. 
4. Varuna waters earth and heaven when he wants to create the 
rain of milk. Mountains are covered by clouds and strong warriors 
slacken them. 
5. I praise this great feat of famous supreme spirit Varuna. He 
measured earth by sun using a standard staying in atmosphere. 
6. Nobody could destroy this great achievement of the 
knowledgeable god. Due to this, flowing rivers can not fill even 
one ocean by their waters. 
7. O Varuna, If we have sinned towards Aryama, Mitra or
Varuna, friends or those always behaving like brothers, those
always near or afar, free us from that. 

 

 140



 

 

8. If we have lied like gamblers or we have actually committed sin 
without knowing it, O Varuna, free us from sins like loosening the 
bond, so that we can be dear to you. 

Verses three and four associate Varuna with waters. Rgveda 
7.49.3-4 and Yajurveda 19.94 say that Varuna is the king of waters. 
We have already seen that the water of the Vedas is matter and anti-
matter. Most matter and anti-matter particles are electrically charged. 
Among the electrically charged particles electron is the most 
important particle. The position of electron among fundamental 
particles is worthy of calling electron the king of particles. Thus 
Varuna can be identified with electron. Now, we should keep in mind 
that sages chose every word very carefully to declare its own 
meaning. Varuna means one who covers and does that apply to an 
electron? In fact, it does. Electron covers an atom, so that scientists 
refer to it as electron cloud. Now we should see how this 
identification fits in the framework of the Vedas. 

In verse eight sages ask Varuna to loosen the bond and free them 
from sins. The net of Varuna is mentioned several times in the 
Rgveda (1.24.13,1.24.15,1.25.21,7.88.7). In Rgveda 6.74.4 sage asks 
to be freed from the net of Varuna. What is this net made of? 
"Varuna's net is not made of ropes, but people are caught by it." 

Rgveda 7.84.2 
Varuna captures sinners in his net and punishes them. This power 

of Vauna is also referred as Maya of Varuna in Rgveda (5.85.6, 
8.41.3, 8.41.8). This net of Varuna is the electric field surrounding an 
electron and Maya of Varuna is the attractive electric force. Varuna 
is also famous for the spies he employs for overseeing everyone in 
the universe. 
 

"Nobody can deceive the spies of Varuna."      Rgveda 6.67.5 

 141



 

"Varuna's spies see everything by their thousand eyes." 
Atharvaveda 4.16.4 

 
Who are the spies of Varuna? Modern scientists have found out 

who they are. Modern scientists treat electron as an octopus, which 
continuously sends its probing arms at an unimaginable rate to feel 
out its neighborhood[l]. These spies are the virtual particles through 
which electron knows what is in its neighborhood. Thus the 
identification of Varuna with electron fits very well in the 
framework of the Vedas. Further support comes from the following 
description of Varuna. 
 
"Mitra is day and Varuna is night."      Taittiriya Samhita 2.1.7 

 
This description shows Mitra and Varuna to have opposite 

nature. Varuna is called night, and by this his dark or black color is 
stressed. In Vedas black is the color of negative electric charge, 
and electron also carries negative electric charge. Also, Satapatha 
Brahmana 5.2.5.17 says that everything that is black belongs to 
Varuna. Varuna is described as firm on following the laws in 
Rgveda 1.25.8. Electron is also very finicky about maintaining the 
laws. It is because of maintaining an orderly universe that Varuna 
was elevated to the position of supreme deity by Iranians. 

11.2: Ahuramazda 
 
Ahuramazda is the supreme deity in Avesta. Ahura is same as 
Asura of Sanskrit as Iranians invariably pronounced Sanskrit V as 
"h". In later Indian scriptures Asuras formed the forces of evil and 
Devas the forces of good. However, in the Rgveda Asura is not 
used in a derogatory sense. In the Rgveda Varuna is often called by 
the adjective Asura (1.24.14, 2.28.7, 8.42.1). The character of 
Varuna and Ahuramazda is strikingly similar. 

 

 142



 

 Moreover, in the Rgveda Mitra and Varuna are worshipped as a pair 
"Mitravarunau" and in the Avesta, Mitra and Ahura are worshipped as a 
pair "Mithrahura", and again the character of these two pairs are 
strikingly similar. Therefore it can be safely said that Ahuramazda of 
ancient Iranians is none other than Varuna. When Iranians forgot the 
real meaning of the Vedas, they needed to reorganize their religion. As 
a civilized people trying to maintain an orderly society, they raised 
Varuna to the pedestal of supreme deity, as Varuna stood for self-
righteousness and order,  Devas associated with the warlike qualities 
were made into the forces of evil. 
 The Avesta describes Ahura in the following way. Ahura is the 
ruler of entire world (Yasna 31.1). Ahura is the best and most 
powerful king, whose orders can not be violated by anyone (Yasna 
27.1 and 31.2). Ahura has fixed the place of sun, moon, earth, seas and 
rivers. He has fixed and controls the path of sun and stars (Yasna 37.1 
and 44.1). He has created day and night (Yasna 44.5). He is awake day 
and night and sees the good and bad deeds of people (Yasna 31.13 and 
Vendidad 19.20). Nobody can deceive him, he is wise and great 
(Yasna 43.6 and 45.4). Mazda means wise. Similar description of 
Varuna is found in the Rgveda. Vamna is wise (Rgveda 1.124.14). 
Varuna is called king in Rgveda 1.24.7. Varuna has widened the path 
of sun (Rgveda 1.24.8). He has divided day and night and seasons 
(7.66.11). Varuna is the source of Rta (Rgveda 2.28.5) and so is Ahura 
source of Asa (Yasna 10.4). Thus the equivalence of Vamna and 
Ahuramazda is proven beyond doubt. Now let's try to find out the 
identity of the famous companion of Varuna, that is Mitra. 
 
 
 

11.3: Mitra 
There is only one hymn dedicated to Mitra in Rgveda. In twenty 
four other hymns Mitra is worshipped together with Varuna. As 

 143



 

Varuna has been identified as electron, it immediately follows that 
Mitra be identified as proton. Mitra means friend, and protons do sit 
together like friends inside the nucleus of an atom. Depiction of 
Mitra as day in Taittiriya Samhita 2.1.7 also supports this 
identification. Day stands for brightness and white color, which was 
chosen by Vedic sages to represent positive electric charge. Proton 
carries unit positive charge, and it is for this reason that there is only 
one hymn dedicated to Mitra. 

 
Rgveda 3.59 

Sage: Visvamitra; Deity: Mitra; Metre: Tristupa, 6-9 - Gayatri 

1. Mitra orders people to do their work. Mitra upholds earth and 
heaven. Mitra oversees the people without winking. Make the 
oblation containing butter for Mitra. 
2. O Mitra, son of Aditi, that mortal becomes happy, who follows 
your laws. (He) is neither killed nor won, who is protected by you. 
Sin does not enter him either from near or from afar. 
3. Without disease, happy, walking among the best place of earth, 
firm-kneed, following Aditya's laws, we want to stay under the great 
intellect of Mitra. 
4. This venerable, serveable, intelligent king Mitra has been born. 
We want to live according to the auspicious intellect of that adorable 
(Mitra). 
5. One should bow to go near great Aditya. Instigating men to do 
their work, (Mitra) provides happiness. For that venerable Mitra 
offer this oblation in Agni. 
6. Favor of God Mitra, bearer of cultivators is laden with spoils. His 
splendor has most wonderful fame. 

 
7. This famous Mitra pervades heaven by his greatness and earth 
by sounds. 
8. Five men offer oblation for Mitra, one who renders powerful 
assistance. He holds all the gods. 
9. Mitra fulfills the desires of those following the laws among 

 

 144



 

the gods and mortals for people who gather and spread the sacrificial 
grass. 

 

Mitra became Mithra in Iran and later Mihira meaning sun. 
Vedic god Mitra was once worshipped as Mithra all over Europe. 

11.4: Rise and Fall of Mithraism 

In first century C.E. Mithraism started to gain popularity in 
Roman empire. It spread with extreme rapidity and by third century 
C.E. it has reached the height of popularity. The greatest number of 
Mithraea are found in Germany. Mithraea have been found all i   over 
Europe including Italy, Switzerland, Britain, France and Spain. For 
more than three centuries Mithraism was practiced all over Roman 
empire. Scholars have tried to explain the symbolism behind 
Mithraism without taking the Rgveda into account. Many scholars 
hold the view that the concept of Mitra was borrowed by Indians 
from Iran, because Mitra is not a prominent god in the Rgveda. He has 
been dedicated only one hymn. This kind of reasoning can not apply to 
the Rgveda. The Rgveda has only one hymn dedicated to the Purusa, 
but there is no doubt that the Purusa hymn is the most important hymn 
of the Rgveda according to Indian tradition. There is only one hymn 
for Mitra, because proton has a unit positive charge. Also, there are 
twenty four complete hymns in which Mitra is invoked together with 
Varuna, so Mitra is not a neglected god in the Rgveda. It was Iranians 
who borrowed the concept of Mitra from India.The Rgveda is a 
complete book of cosmology, and therefore parts of it can not be 
borrowed from elsewhere. Others borrowed the Rgvedic ideas without 
even knowing what they stood for. The Vedic ideas were spread in 
Iran after the Mahabharata war when the Indus Valley Civilization 
declined. 

 145



 

 

Let's try to understand Mithraic symbolism in the light of Vedic 
wisdom. Mithraea, temples of Mithra, were designed to look like caves, 
which symbolized the universe. A cave is surrounded by stones and the 
Rgveda depicts the universe to be surrounded by mountains as we have 
seen earlier. Gods did not exist before the creation of the universe 
according to the Rgveda. Thus gods came into existence by breaking up 
the mountains covering the universe. This is the secret of the rock birth 
of Mithra. David Ulansey illustrates the birth of Mithra in his book "The 
Origins of the Mithraic Mysteries" [2]. Mithra was depicted as coming 
out of an egg shaped rock which is entwined by a serpent. Universe was 
considered egg shaped by the Vedic sages, and this idea was spread all 
over the globe. Earlier I described Vrtra the serpent as the cover of the 
universe based on logical reasoning and scriptural support. Now we 
have found a rock solid proof of my reasoning that Vrtra covered the 
whole universe. Proponents of the Aryan Invasion Theory have accused 
Indra of breaking the dams of Dravidian people by identifying Vrtra the 
serpent as a dam holding water. Here is positive proof that they are 
clueless about the meaning of the Vedas. The most prominent feature of 
Mithraic iconography is the slaying of bull by Mithra. When Mithra 
slays the Bull, instead of blood all kinds of herbs and plants sprang from 
the victim. This reminds us of the sacrifice of the Purusa by gods. Birth 
of Mithra from rock is similar to the birth of Vedic god Indra. Indra later 
became a sun god and subordinate to supreme god Visnu. Mithra was 
also a sun god whose birthday was celebrated on 25th December. 

In Mithraic theology, Mithra was not the supreme god, but sub-
ordinate to Leontocephalous Kronos, the lion headed time god. The 
illustrations of Leontocephalous Kronos can be seen in David Ulansey's 
book "The Origins of the Mithraic Mysteries"[3]. The lion-headed god 
is shown as having a pair of wings and his body is entwined six times 
by a serpent. The head of the serpent rests on the skull of the god. So 
far researchers have not given 

 146



 

 

any thought to the Indian origin of Mithraism, rather all attempts have 
been made to find its origin in Iran. India was the land from which 
copious myths spread in all directions, and it is highly probable that 
Mithraism was developed by a group of Indians who had access to the 
secret science of the Vedas, now largely forgotten. 

Lion headed god of Mithraism seems to be a modified form of 
Nrsimha incarnation of Lord Visnu. Visnu incarnates as a lion headed 
god to kill demon Hiranyakasipu. He rests on the coils of serpent 
Sesanaga who provides shade to him by spreading his head above. 
Vehicle of Lord Visnu is eagle Garuda. In Mithraism serpent Sesanaga 
envelops lion headed god and wings of Garuda become transplanted on 
the god himself. Moreover, the Satapatha Brahmana says that "Kalo vai 
Visnu" meaning Visnu is time indeed. Thus it stands to reason that the 
lion headed god of Mithraism is only a modified form of Lord Visnu in 
his Nrsimha incarnation. The spread of Mithraism was the result of the 
third wave of emigration of ideas from India. First wave spread the 
knowledge of the Vedas in Iran, second wave spread the knowledge of 
the Brahmanas in Greece and the third wave spread the knowledge of 
the Puranas in Roman empire. 

The decline of Mithraism started with the rise of Christianity. 
During their struggle for supremacy, Christianity absorbed many 
elements of Mithraism. Arnold Toynbee has called Mithraism the 
"Crucible of Christianity". Franz Cumont in his classic work "The 
Mysteries of Mithra" draws our attention to the similarities between 
Mithraism and Christianity[4]. Both performed baptism for 
purification. Both considered Sunday sacred. Both celebrated 25th of 
December, Mithras as birthday of Mithra and Christians as birthday of 
Christ. Both believed in Heaven and Hell and a flood at the beginning. 
Both believed in a last judgment and resurrection of the dead. 

Some of the elements that Christianity borrowed from Mitraism 
are considered blasphemous by orthodox Christians. 

 147



 

 

In an article titled "Let's Keep Christ Out of Xmas" maintained on 
Internet, Pastor Greg Wilson of Landmark Independent Baptist Church 
says that Christmas has nothing to do with Jesus Christ. He further 
states that he has no desire to honor baby Mithras on his December 
25th birthday and urges all Christians to keep Christ out of the pagan 
Xmas mess[5]. 

Once Christianity became strong enough, it exterminated 
Mithraism by force. Titus Marcus II, Mithrasic High Priest wrote in a 
letter in 325 C.E. that most Mithraea have been looted and burnt and 
Mithras are meeting in private homes[6]. Patriarch George provoked a 
bloody riot in December 361 C.E., when he attempted to erect a 
church on the ruins of a Mithraeum. Many Mithras were falsely 
implicated in a conspiracy and put to death in 371 C.E. Mithraea were 
sacked and burned with the complicity of the authorities. Cumont 
describes the persecution of Mithras saying Christianity demanded the 
total destruction of idolatory, and its exhortations were promptly 
carried into effect[7]. 

By the end of the fourth century C.E. Mithraism was finished by 
Christianity. Its fall was as swift as its rise. But Mithraism did not die 
after all, it lied dormant somewhere in the collective memory of 
Europeans. In eighteenth century these ideas took a concrete shape and 
Mithraism got a new birth in the form of Freemasonry. 

11.5: Aryama 
 
There is no separate hymn for Aryama in the Rgveda, and his name is 
often invoked together with Mitra and Varuna. After identifying Mitra 
with proton and Varuna with electron, it is natural to identify Aryama 
with neutron. In the Vedas Varuna, Mitra and Aryama form a triad 
similar to that of electron, proton and neutron. They are often invoked 
together. Now we can understand why there is no hymn addressed to 
Aryama. When 

 148



 

 
sages say mat their praises are reaching the deities, what is meant is the 
propagation of field. Neutron being charge neutral does not get affected 
by electric field, so there is no hymn devoted to him. Aryama means 
friend, and neutrons also sit together like friends inside the atomic 
nucleus. In Iran Aryama became Airyaman and kept same meaning. He 
was invoked during marriage ceremony in India and Iran. Here is a 
hymn in which Aryama is invoked together with Mitra and Varuna. 

Rgveda 1.41 
Sage: Kanva Ghaura; Deity: Varuna, Mitra and Aryama, 4-6 - 

Adityas; Metre: Gayatri 

1. Who is protected by wise Varuna, Mitra and Aryama, that person 
can not be suppressed. 
2. Who is nourished by them, that mortal is protected from harm. He 
is safe from all sides. 
3. These kings destroy the towns and citadels of hostile people. They 
take us beyond sins. 
4. O Adityas! The roads of truth are easy to travel and without thorns. 
There is no destroyer here. 
5. O leader Adityas! The Yajna that you perform on roads of truth, 
how can that be destroyed by your meditation? 
6. That mortal obtains gems, all wealth and children as well easily 
without being harmed. 
7. O friends, how are we going to write the hymns worthy of 
describing the greatness of Mitra, Aryama and Varuna. 
8. Who kills those aspiring to be gods or who curses them, let him not 
talk to me. Let us satisfy you by devotion. 
9. Who holds the four objects, let people fear from his opponents. Let 
us not desire to talk in dirty language. 

 

By now it will he clear that the Rgveda is a book of physics. There 
are many concepts in the Vedas, which we can identify by 

 

 149



 

 

their equivalents in modern physics. It is also to be noted that the 
Rgveda and modern physics differ on many vital points, and therefore 
many Vedic terms have no equivalents in modern physics, for 
example Vrtra, Antariksa and Dyau. It is up to the physicists to probe 
deeper in the nature of reality and find out whether the Vedas are 
wrong or modern physics needs to be modified. If someone 
discovered the ultimate laws of physics five thousand years ago, 
coded those laws in the form of a sacred book, and made sure that not 
a single letter of that book would be altered in any way, then it is the 
duty of scientists to investigate this matter very seriously. We have 
seen that the Vedic sages knew about electric force and electron, now 
we will see that they knew about electric charge, electricity and 
magnetic field as well. 

 150



 

"Nothing is too wonderful to be true." - 
Michael Faraday 

 

lll
e 

12. Electricity and 
Magnetism 

In Chapter five Indra was identified as electric force. If Vedic sages 
knew the existence of electric force, they must have had precise 
knowledge of related scientific phenomena. You are about to find 
out that the phenomena of electricity and magnetism have been 
described in detail in the Vedas. We will start by taking up the 
discussion of Soma, the drink of the gods. 

12.1: Soma 

The Rgveda is emphatic in saying that real meaning of Soma is 
very different from the apparent meaning of a herbal plant, whose 
juice is supposed to be very intoxicating. 
 

"When herb is crushed, people think they have drunk Soma. The 
Soma mat wise people know, nobody can eat that." 

 Rgveda 10.85.3 

 151



 

Soma has a very important place in the Rgveda. The ninth book 
of the Rgveda consisting of 114 hymns is solely dedicated to 
purifying Soma. Gods are invoked to drink the juice of Soma. Indra 
is often described in the Vedas as drinking juice of Soma. The 
effect of drinking Soma is quite intoxicating on Indra. He performs 
great deeds under the influence of Soma. If Indra is electric force, 
Soma can be identified as electric charge. Electric force depends on 
the magnitude of electric charge, greater the charge, larger the 
force. According to Rgveda 10.42.4 Indra does not befriend those 
who do not offer Soma. This is so because electric force can act 
between electrically charged particles only. Electric force cannot act 
on an uncharged particle. The relationship of Soma with 
fundamental particles is described in the Vedas. Following question 
is asked in the Vedas: 
 
"What is the semen of strong horse?" 

Rgveda 1.164.34, Yajurveda 23.61 

Answer is provided in the next verse. 

"Soma is the semen of strong horse." 
Rgveda 1.164.35, Yajurveda 23.62 

 
It is noteworthy that Soma as a plant can not be related to the 

semen of horse as an animal. The Vedas are full of such 
descriptions, which make no sense at all unless we realize what the 
Vedas are about. Here Soma is electric charge and horse is Asva 
particle. These verses are saying that electric charge is distributed 
all over Asva particle. In Rgveda 1.28.9 and 9.65.25 Soma is said 
to be kept on cow's skin, in Rgveda 9.66.29 Soma is said to play on 
the skin of cow. This means that electric charge is distributed over 
the surface of Gau particle. The Vedas make a difference about 
whether charge is distributed all over the particle or only on the 
surface. In modern physics such questions do not 

 

 152



 

arise because fundamental particles are considered point particles. 
Another recurring theme in the Rgveda is that of purification of 
Soma by passage through hair of sheep (9.6.1,9.20.1). This refers 
to passage of electric charge through field lines of Avi particle, but 
meaning of purification is not clear to me. 

Soma lives on mountain (Rgveda 9.82.3). The name of this 
mountain is Munjavana. There is no mountain to be identified by 
this name. In the Vedas surface of the universe is called mountain. 
Matter and energy is created at the surface of the universe. As 
most of the matter particles are electrically charged, electric charge 
is also created at the surface. It is in this sense that Soma is said to 
live on mountain. Outside of the universe is considered ten-
dimensional in Vedas. In Rgveda 9.6.5 and 9.8.4, it is said that ten 
fingers take care of Soma. Ten women call Soma in Rgveda 
9.56.3. The ten dimensions are represented as ten fingers or ten 
women and these verses represent creation at the surface of the 
universe. 

12.2: Indu 
 

In the Rgveda there are two related terms "Soma" and "Indu", both 
have come to mean moon in later literature. Another word for 
moon "Candrama" also occurs in the Rgveda, which is again used 
in a technical sense, because Candrama is said to reside in waters. 
In the Rgveda, word Soma is used for the herbal plant and word 
Indu is used for its juice. Having identified Indra with electric 
force and Soma with electric charge, Indu can be identified with 
electricity. Electricity is the flow of electric charge, and when 
juice of Soma flows it is called Indu. Here is a beautiful hymn 
dedicated to Indu. 
 

 153



 

Rgveda 9.2 
Sage: Medhatithi Kanva; Deity: Pavamana Soma; 

Metre: Gayatri 

1. Soma is very gratifying to the gods, pure and pleasing. Indu, 
enter in mighty Indra. 
2. Indu possesses great strength and splendor. Give us those 
qualities. Upholder sit in Yajna. 
3. The pious stream of Soma juice provides lovely honey. 
Performer of good deeds lives with water. 
4. Great rivers carrying water come to you, mighty, when you are 
mixed with cows. 
5. Who holds and keeps heaven and ocean apart, is mixed in 
water. Purified Soma comes to us. 
6. Worthy of perception like great Mitra, strong Hari makes 
sound. He brightens by sun. 
7. Indu, your praises purify, activate and provide strength, by 
which you brighten for happiness. 
8. We ask you to encourage us. You inspire the world to work. 
Your glories are great. 
9. Indu, you take us to Indra. Purify us by sweet streams, like rain 
producing clouds. 
10. Indu, you provide cows, men, horses and food. You are the 
first soul of Yajna. 

 
Verses three to five relate Soma to water. Water represents 

matter and anti-matter, and their association with Soma means 
that matter and antimatter are electrically charged. First half of 
verse three is the most important clue to another scientific 
phenomena. It tells us that honey is provided by the stream of 
Soma juice. Word for honey in Sanskrit is Madhu and the Vedic 
literature is full of allusions to a hidden knowledge called Main* 
Vidya, knowledge of Madhu. This is the right time to discover the 
secret of Madhu Vidya. 

 

 154



 

12.3: Madhu 
 
It is well understood in Physics that phenomena of electricity, and 

magnetism are interrelated. A moving electric charge gives rise to 
magnetic field. Stream of Soma juice is the movement of electric 
charge, and if it provides Madhu, then Madhu must be magnetic field. 
Now Madhu or honey tastes sweet, and it is for this reason that Madhu 
also means sweet. In the Vedas almost to everything in the universe is 
described as sweet or full of honey. 

Consider the following verses: 
 

"Truthful air is sweet, rivers are flowing with honey. Herbs are 
pppfull of honey for us." Rgveda 1.90.6 

"Night and dawn are sweet, dust of earth is soaked with honey.
Father heaven be sweet for us. Rgveda 1.90.7 
 

"Vegetation be soaked with honey for us, sun be soaked with 
honey. Cows be full of honey for us. Rgveda 1.90.8 
 

One verse from Upanisad says: 
 

"This earth is honey for all beings, and all beings are honey for 
earth." Brhadaranyaka Upanisad 2.5.1 

 

These verses are telling us that magnetic field pervades almost 
everything in the universe. In Rgveda 2.10.6 Agni is called full of 
honey. This signifies that magnetic field carries energy. Rgveda 
7.47.2 says that waves of water are full of honey and Rgveda 
10.30,13 describes waters as carrying honey. These verses describe  
the magnetic field generated by the movement of electrically chained 
particles. In Rgveda 1.90.8 sage prays for the their cows  to become Ml 
of sweetness. This verse describes the magnetic field around Gau 
particle. 

 

 155



 

Brhaddevata 3.19-22 tells the following story about the secret 
knowledge of Madhu: 
 
"Sage Dadhichi knew the knowledge of Madhu. Indra told the sage 
not to mention the knowledge of honey to anyone, otherwise he will 
kill the sage. Asvins asked the sage for knowledge of honey and the 
sage expressed his inability quoting Indra's threat. Asvins implored 
the sage to give the knowledge while having the shape of a horse-
headed man. Upon his nod, Asvins cut the head of the sage and 
joined the head of a horse to the body of sage and received the 
knowledge of Madhu. When Indra came to know of this, he severed 
the head of horse from the sage. Asvins joined the original head of 
the sage and revived him." 

 
This story is based on Rgveda 1.116.12 and 10.48.2. These 

verses point towards an intimate connection between Madhu and 
Asvins. It is time to investigate this connection and unravel the 
secret of Asvins. 

12.4: Asvins 
 
Asvins are twin gods in the Vedas. They are always mentioned as a 
pair. One of them is called Nasatya and other is called Dasra. Asvins 
are considered physicians of the gods. In Greek mythology they are 
called Dioskauroi. In the Avesta they are called Naomhaithya 
(Nasatya) and are considered demons. 

We have two important clues to figure out the secret of Asvins. 
One, they are related to magnetic field and two, they are twins. Does 
something very familiar ring a bell? Of course, the magnetic poles. 
Asvins are magnetic poles. Magnetic poles are always found as a 
pair. They can never be isolated. Let's see if our identification of 
Asvins with the magnetic poles finds further support in the Vedas. 

 

 156



 

 

Asvins are called Madhuvarna, having color of honey, in Rgveda 
8.26.6. In Rgveda 5.75 Asvins are called Madhvi, full of  sweetness, in 
all nine verses. They are called Madhuyu, filled with honey, in Rgveda 
5.73.8 and 5.74.9. In Rgveda 1.180.2 they are called Madhupa and in 
Rgveda 8.22.17 Madhupatama, both words meaning drinkers of honey. 
According to Rgveda 1.112.21 and 10.40.6, Asvins provide honey to 
honeybees. His chariot is called Madhuvarna, having color of honey, in 
Rgveda 5.77.3. His chariot is also called Madhuvahana, vehicle for 
carrying honey, in Rgveda 1.34.2, 1.157.3 and 10.41.2. They have a 
madhumati kasa, a whip soaked in honey, according to Rgveda 1.22.3 
and 1.157.4. Obviously these descriptions describe a very intimate  
connection  between  Madhu  and  Asvins. Anthropomorphic 
description of gods is the style of the Rgveda to convey abstruse 
scientific knowledge in a dramatic way. Here the connection between 
the magnetic field and the magnetic poles fis so strong that Asvins have 
been described as drinking honey, carrying honey, even having the 
color of honey. You will recall that a similar description of god Savita 
is found in the Rgveda. Savita has golden hands, golden eyes and 
golden tongue. He has a golden chariot. His chariot has golden axle and 
golden front. Energy is described as golden in the Vedas, and therefore 
god Savita has been described as having everything golden. Once we 
know the scientific meaning of the Vedas, then we realize that these 
descriptions are not arbitrary, but there is a remarkable precision in 
these representations. 
There are forty two complete hymns dedicated to two Asvins in the 
Rgveda (1.34,1.46-47,1.112,1.116-120,1.157-158,1.180- 
184,2.39,3.58,4.43-45, 5.73-78, 6.62-63, 7.67-74, 8.22, 10.39-41, 
10.106, 10.143). Now is the perfect time to ponder over the scientific 
meaning of a mysterious hymn dedicated to twin gods Asvins. 

 157



 

Rgveda 1.34 Sage: Hiranyastupa Angirasa; Deity: 
Asvins; Metre: Jagati, 9,12 - Tristupa 

1. O learned, today be ours three times. O Asvins, your chariot and 
gift are all-pervading. Like (warm) clothes are intimately connected 
with winter, you two come very near to wise people. 
2. Chariot carrying honey has three tires. Your longing for Soma is 
well known. Three pillars are fixed on your chariot to give support. 
O Asvins, you travel three times in night and three times a day. 
3. O concealer of imperfection, today mix Yajna with honey three 
times in the same day. O two Asvins, give us strengthening food 
three times fully during morning and evening. 
4. Come to our home three times. Go to your followers three times. 
Teach the three kinds of knowledge three times to good people. O 
two Asvins, carry the pleasure providing materials three times and 
nourish us with permanent food three times. 
5. O two Asvins, carry the wealth three times, come to Yajna three 
times and protect our intellect three times. Give wealth three times 
and grains three times. Daughter of sun is now riding on your chariot 
with three wheels. 
 
6. O Asvins, give us the herbs from heaven three times, from earth 
three times and from waters three times. O lord of good fortune, for 
the protection and happiness of our children provide the threefold 
shelter. 
7. O adorable Asvins, sit down on our altar of threefold earth 
everyday three times. O charioteer Asvins, come to our homes three 
times even from faraway places like the life giving air. 
8. O Asvins, three containers have been filled three times by the 
seven mother rivers. Oblation is also divided in three. You protect 
three earths and the vault of heaven above day and night. 
9. O Nasatya, where are the three wheels of the chariot with three 
enclosures? Where are the three connections in the same 

 

 158



 

place. When will the strong donkeys be yoked in your chariot riding 
which you come to the Yajna. 
10. O Nasatya, come here, where oblation is being offered. Drink sweet 
drinks by your mouths used to drinking honey. Savita instigates your 
beautiful chariot smeared with clarified butter even 
before dawn for Yajna. 

11.0 Nasatya Asvins, come here to drink honey with three times eleven 
gods. Make our lives prolonged, purify us by removing our 
weaknesses, remove jealousy and always stay with us  
12.0 Asvins, bring to us good warriors and wealth by your chariot of 
three enclosures. I call you hearers for our protection. May we expand 
in battles. 
 
A special connection is made between Asvins and number| three in 
these verses. Three containers in verse eight are three spaces, earth, 
atmosphere and heaven. Meaning of invoking Asvins to come three 
times everyday will become clear later, when I discuss Vedic 
cosmology. For now we will focus our, attention to another 
phenomenon deeply connected with electricity and magnetism, that of 
light. 

 159



 
 

 160



 

"I do not know what I may appear to the world, but to myself I seem to 
have been only like a boy playing on the seashore, and diverting myself in 
now and then finding a smoother pebble or a prettier shell than ordinary, 
whilst the great ocean of truth lay all undiscovered before me." 

- Isaac Newton 
  

13. Let There be Light 

When we think of light, our attention is immediately turned towards the 
sun, or "Surya" in Sanskrit. Surya has a unique identity in the Rgveda, 
and can not be confused with other deities, who have merged their 
identity in the sun of the post-vedic literature. As the Rgveda is a coded 
book, actual meaning of Surya is not sun in the Rgveda. Five complete 
hymns have been dedicated to Surya in the Rgveda (1.50, 1.115, 10.37, 
10.158, 10.170). There are eighteen other mantras dedicated to Surya in 
hymns dedicated to other gods (Rgveda 1.164.46-47, 4.40.5, 
5.40.5,7.60.1,7.62.1-3,7.63.1-5,7.66.14-16,8.101.11-12). Surya is time 
and again related to eyes in the Vedas. 

"From his mind moon was born, from his eyes Surya was born. 
Rgveda 10.90.13

 161



 

"O Surya, give our eyes the power to see."     Rgveda 10.158.4 
 
"Surya is the Lord of eyes." Atharvaveda 5.24.9 

 
Even in the Brahmanas identification of Surya with eyes 

continues, however at some places Surya starts to be substituted by 
other deities who have merged their identity in Surya. 
 
"Surya is situated in my eyes."    Taittiriya Brahmana 3.10.8.7 
 
"Which is your eye, that is Aditya." Satapatha Brahmana 10.3.3.7 

 
The eyes are related to light, and that is exactly what the Vedas 

mean, when they talk about Surya. Considering that the Rgveda is 
a book of cosmology, it can not mean sun by Surya, because sun 
has no special place in the cosmos. Sun is one out of billions of 
stars in the universe, and the Rgveda in order to be consistent must 
deal with more fundamental properties of the universe. There are 
ample evidences to prove that Surya does not mean sun in the 
Rgveda. The Rgveda talks about several Suryas in verses 9.114.3 
and 10.88.18, while there can be hardly any doubt that sun is only 
one. 

Surya has been called "Urucaksa" in Rgveda 7.35.8 and 
"Duredrsa" in Rgveda 10.37.1, both meaning seeing very far. 
Surya is also called "Visvacaksa" meaning seeing all in Rgveda 
1.50.2. These descriptions fit very well with the identification of 
Surya with light. 

Rgveda 1.115 Sage: Kutsa Angirasa; Deity: Surya; 
Metre: Tristupa 

 
1. Eye of Mitra, Varuna and Agni and front army of gods has risen. 
He has pervaded heaven, earth and atmosphere. Surya is the soul of 
moving and unmoving. 

 

 162



 

 

2. Surya follows radiant goddess Usa like a man follows a beautiful 
woman, where men desiring to become god stretch time by good deeds 
for welfare of people. 
3. Auspicious green horses of Surya are wonderful, pleasing and 
always moving. Venerables spread on the surface of heaven and 
immediately go round earth and heaven. 
4. That is the glory and godliness of Surya that he pulls away his rays 
in the middle of actions. When he pulls away his green horses from 
world, night spreads its cloth for him. 
5. That Surya creates forms near heaven for observation of Mitra and 
Varuna. His green horses take two forms, one of infinite brightness and 
vigor, and other black. 
6. O gods! Protect us from sins and blamable deeds when Surya is 
rising. Let Mitra, Varuna, Aditi, Sindhu, earth and heaven express 
approval for our statements. 

 

In the first verse Surya is called the eye of Mitra, Varuna and Agni. 
In Rgveda 7.63.1 also Surya is called the eye of Mitra and Varuna. 
Similar views are expressed in verse five quoted above as well. Mitra 
and Varuna have been identified with electron and proton earlier. How 
do protons and electrons find out what is around them? They 
continuously send signals all around them. These signals are 
electromagnetic waves, and light is also electromagnetic wave. It is in 
this sense that Surya is considered the eye of Mitra and Varuna. When 
this scientific meaning was forgotten, Surya, Mitra and Varuna along 
with many other gods came to mean just sun. In verse five, horses of 
Surya are said to take two forms, bright and black. These two forms 
are that of particle and anti-particle. The Rgveda calls particle form 
bright and anti-particle form black or dark. 

The field properties of light are described in the Rgveda by calling 
Surya as Sociskesa, having inflamed hair (1.50.8), or Kesina, having 
fine hair (1.164.44,10.136.1) or Harikesa, having green hair (10.37.9). 
Having inflamed hair signifies that field is 

 163



 

another form of energy. Surya is described as having green hair 
and his chariot is also driven by green horses. Both of these 
descriptions describe same phenomenon, which has nothing to do 
with either hair or horses. Number of horses driving the chariot 
of Surya is seven. 
 
"Seven draw the chariot of Surya, one horse having seven names 
draws the chariot." Rgveda 1.164.2 
 
"Seven horses draw the chariot of Surya" Rgveda 5.45.9 

 
These seven horses are the seven colors comprising light. 

These seven colors become visible in a rainbow or when light 
passes through a prism. Green color was chosen to represent light 
as green light falls in the middle of electromagnetic spectrum 
comprising seven colors of light. 

In modern physics light is considered a wave as well as 
particle. Light particle is called photon. In the Vedas Gau particle 
seems to be related to the concept of photon. Cows of sun are 
mentioned in Rgveda 7.36.1. This would mean Gau particles of 
light. Photons have a very special property. They are considered 
massless, meaning they do not have any rest mass. The Yajurveda 
also has same opinion about Gau particle. 
 
"What does not possess mass?" Yajurveda 23.47 
 
"Cow does not possess mass." Yajurveda 23.48 

 
Reader should note that these verses can not apply to an animal 

called cow. The information in the Vedas is coded, and only those 
who were familiar with the code could understand the meaning of 
the Vedas. The Vedic code was gradually forgotten over time, but 
some part of the code was remembered up to the first half of this 
millenium. A very surprising piece of evidence to this effect 

 

 164



 

 

has surfaced up recently. Professor Subhash Kak has discussed in a 
recent article the value of the speed of light as given by Sayana[1]. 
Sayana (1315-1387 A.D.) was the prime minister in the court of 
Emperors Bukka I and his succesors of the Vijayanagar empire. Sayana 
was a well known Vedic scholar. In his commentary on Rgveda 1.50.4, 
he says that sun (Surya) traverses 2,202 yojanas in half a nimesa. 
Yojana is an ancient 
Indian unit of length, and nimesa is the unit of time. Upon conversion 
into modem units, this yields the value of 186,000 s miles per second 
for the speed of sun. Now, it is well known that speed of light is 
186,000 miles per second. Thus Sayana was describing the speed of 
light, and not that of sun, following the Vedic tradition of coding the 
knowledge.  

How did light originate? The Vedas provides various clues: 
Gods took out Surya from ocean." Rgveda 10.72.7 
Indra created Surya." Rgveda 2.12.7 

         Indra and Visnu created Surya." Rgveda 7.99.4 
 "Surya was created by Usa." Rgveda 7.78.3 

    "Sun was bom from Vrtra." Atharvaveda 4.10.5 
 

These verses are saying that light originated due to expansion of 
the universe by electric force. The Rgveda is very clear that Surya 
resides in the light space, and not in the observer space or intermediate 
space. 
"Surya is son of heaven." Rgveda 10.37.1 
Indra and Soma established Surya above."       Rgveda 6.72.2 

 165



 

 

It is for this reason that I have given the scientific name of heaven as 
light space. Energy has three principal forms in three spaces, Surya in 
heaven, Vayu in atmosphere and Agni in earth. It is for this reason that 
Vayu and Agni are called brothers of Surya in Rgveda 1.164.1. Surya is 
also very intimately associated with goddess USA. Rgveda 1.115.2
says that Surya follows USA like a man follows a beautiful lady. We 
will take up the discussion of USA next to understand the meaning of 
this mantra. 

 166



 

"I 'saw' cascades of energy coming down from outer space, in which particles 
were created and destroyed in rhythmic pulses; I 'saw' the atoms of the 
elements and those of my body participating in this cosmic dance of energy; I 
felt its rhythm and I 'heard' its sound, and at that moment I knew that this was 
the Dance of Siva, the Lord of Dancers worshipped by Hindus." 

- Fritjof Capra 

 

14. The Dance of Creation 

Two words for the world in Sanskrit are Jagata and Samsara. Jagata 
means one that is continuously moving and Samsara means one that 
is always flowing. It was well understood by the Vedic sages that 
everything in the universe is continually moving. So much is going 
on behind the scene. So many changes are taking place inside what 
looks like unchanging to us. The concept of two goddesses, USA 
and Nakta, are related to the dynamics of changes unseen by us. 

14.1: USA (Dawn) 

There are twenty complete hymns dedicated to Usa in the Rgveda 
04M9,1.113,1.123-124,3.61,4.51-52,5.79-80,6.64^5,7.75- 

 167



 

 

81, 10.172). Hymns dedicated to Usa are subtle and beautiful. It is 
right time to go through a beautiful hymn dedicated to Usa. 

 
Rgveda 1.123 Sage: Kaksivana 

Dairghatamasa Ausija; Deity: Usa; Metre: 
Tristupa 

1. Grand right-handed chariot of Usa has been assembled and 
immortal gods have taken their seat on it. Leaving behind and 
rising from black darkness, kind Usa intends to provide dwelling 
for mankind. 
2. She wakes up before the whole universe does. She wins riches 
and donates generously. First to be invoked Usa has come and the 
young lady, who takes birth again, has started watching from high 
place. 
3. Well-born goddess Usa gives the share of wealth to mortal men 
today. Let dear god Savita say here for Surya that we are 
sinless. 
4. Everyday she goes to every home and takes form. Wishing to 
obtain the oblations bright Usa always comes and procures the first 
riches. 
5. First to be praised joyful Usa is sister of Bhaga and sibling of 
Varuna. Let's win by your right-handed chariot and the holder of 
sin be caught. 
6. Songs of joy be told in abundance and fires be kindled. Let 
desirable wealth hidden in darkness be manifested by shining 
Usas. 
7. One comes towards, other goes away. Having opposite forms 
they travel one after another. One covers everything in darkness, 
other manifests them by radiant chariot. 
8. They are similar today and they will be similar tomorrow. They 
care for vast abode of Varuna. Each blemishless Usa goes round 
thirty yojanas instantly. 
9. Knower of the name of the first part of the day, white pure 

 168



 

 

Usa manifests from darkness. Young woman does not break the 
universal law and moves separating one day from another. 
10. Like a lady revealing her body, Goddess goes to the God to fulfill 
wishes. Radiant lady shows her breasts in front of him smilingly. 
11. Like a young lady adorned by mother, beautiful Usa shows her 
body. You noble lady keep shining up to far away places. Other Usas 
can not compare to you. 
12. Possessing cows and horses and chosen by all, they try to dispel 
darkness by sun's rays. Usas holding auspicious names go far away 
and come back again. 
13. O Usa, living in accordance with rays of cosmic order, give us the 
desire to perform noble work. Keep shining before us. Give wealth to 
us and rich people. 

 

In verse two Usa is described as first to be invoked and in verse six 
Usa has been asked to manifest the wealth hidden in darkness. This 
wealth is not ordinary wealth, but the stuff that the universe is made of. 
Everywhere in the universe the process of creation and annihilation of 
particles is going on all the time. New particles keep on taking the 
place of old ones, creating an illusion of permanency. Usa is the name 
for the creation of particles. The process of creation starts with Usa and 
therefore she is the first to be invoked. Usa has been frequently 
described as showing her body in the Rgveda. As Usa manifests the 
unmanifested, she is visualized as showing her body. Frequently more 
man one Usa is mentioned as in verse twelve. This is because many 
particles are being created simultaneously everywhere and particles 
have a very short life span. Tilak argues that Aryans lived in Arctic 
region before the diaspora based on the description of several dawns[l]. 
He argues that Arctic region has a very long dawn, which is described 
as being equivalent to many dawns of the Indus Valley. This argument 
is not very logical, as a long dawn will still be described as one dawn, 
and not as many dawns. 

 169



 

Usa shows her breasts like a dancer (Rgveda 1.92.4). Usa keeps 
her breasts open (Rgveda 6.64.2). Figure 14.1 shows a famous 
statue from the Indus Valley known as the dancing girl. We can 
now be more specific than that. This figure is that of Usa. Usa has 
been described as a nude dancing girl in the Rgveda, which is a 
perfect match with the figure. Also, the pose of the dancing girl is a 
classical Indian dance form. 

In verse one and five word "daksinaya" has been used as 
adjective of the chariot of Usa. Satavalekar translates it as 
dexterous, which does not seem correct. Daksa means dexterous, 
but word "daksinaya" is related to daksina meaning right or south. 
This seems to be related to the spin of the particles. In the Rgveda 
Surya is often described as following Usa. This may represent 
emission of photon (light particle) accompanied by the creation of 
particles. As light is represented by sun in the Vedas, this also gives 
us a clue as to why dawn was chosen to represent creation of 
particles. Usa is called Divoduhita, daughter of heaven, in the 
Rgveda. This is because the process of creation starts in light space. 
There is a continuous interaction between light space and observer 
space with energy changing into particles and particles changing 
into energy. 

Verse seven describes Usa and Nakta. Nakta is described as 
covering everything in darkness. We will take up the discussion of 
Nakta now to get further insight in the process of annihilation of 
particles. 

14.2: Nakta (the night) 
 
Nakta means night, but that is not the intended meaning in the 
Vedas. Usa represents the creation of particles and therefore Nakta 
represents the annihilation of particles. It is time to further 
investigate if this interpretation is supported by the Vedas. In 
Yajurveda 23.11 following question is raised: 

 

 170



 

 

Figure 14.1: Usa, the dancer, a statue from Indus Valley 

 171



 

 

"What object is Pilippila and what object is Pisangila?" 
 
Pilippila is something that is very soft and presses very easily. 

Pisangila means one who devours. The answer is given in the next 
mantra of the Yajurveda. 
 
"Avi is Pilippila and night is Pisangila?"       Yajurveda 23.12 

 
Here Avi particle is described as soft and night is described as 

devouring all the forms. However, the inquirer is still curious and 
asks the question again to get a definite answer. Then he gets the 
following answer. 
 
"Aja is Pisangila, who like a dog gets things out and devours it 
again." Yajurveda 23.56 

 
Here Aja particle is related to night as both are described as 

devourer. Reader should recall that Aja is the intermediate stage 
between manifestation of energy into matter particles and vice 
versa. Thus Aja creates forms as well as annihilates forms. In this 
way Aja is related to Usa and Nakta both. The relationship of 
Nakta with annihilation of particles is made clear in the following 
verse from the Rgveda as well, where Nakta is related to Savita. 
 
"Night was created for the birth of Savita."      Rgveda 1.113.1 

 
Savita is the creation-annihilation energy of the particles, and 

as the annihilation energy Savita is related to night. As with many 
other Vedic themes, the depiction of the cosmic dance of creation 
and annihilation went through changes during the age of the 
Puranas. 

 172



 

 

14.3: Lord of the Dancers 
 

 

Creation and annihilation of particles is a continuous process. 
Everywhere in the universe this process is going on. The Vedic sages 
envisaged this process as a cosmic dance of creation, and therefore 
Usa is represented as a dancer. In later Hinduism this dance of 
creation is represented by the cosmic dance of Lord Siva. It is for this 
reason that Lord Siva is also called Nataraja, the Lord of the dancers. 
This dance is the creation and annihilation of matter and anti-matter. 
Energy changes into a pair of matter and anti-matter particles and 
when a particle and its anti-particle collide, they change into energy. 
We will take up the production of a pair of matter and anti-matter 
particles in the next chapter. 
 
 

 

 173



 
 

 174



 

I believe that the discovery of particles and anti-particles by 
Dirac has changed our whole outlook on atomic physics." 

- Heisenberg 
 

15. Pair Production 

Male and female species form a pair in animal kingdom. A similar 
relationship exists in the particle world. Particles are also formed in a 
pair. Our universe is dominated by a set of particles, which we call 
matter. The opposite pairs of these particles are called anti-particles 
and the set of these anti-particles is called antimatter. When a particle 
meets its anti-particle, they annihilate and change into energy. Energy 
under certain conditions changes into a pair of particle and anti-
particle. The Vedas describe the opposing nature of matter and anti-
matter in several ways. 

15.1: Matter and Anti-matter 

The Vedas describe matter and anti-matter as twins. This is indeed a perfect 
description, as particle and its anti-particle are born me same womb (energy). 
Sometimes these twins 

 175



 

are described as both sisters and sometimes as one brother and 
other sister. As these descriptions are not of human beings, these 
analogies are valid. 
 
"Two female twins manifest in various forms. Out of them, one 
is white and other is black. The black and white females are sisters. 
This is one of the great deeds of gods." Rgveda 3.55.11 

 
The Vedas describe matter as white and anti-matter as black. 

Universe consists of matter and anti-matter. A verse from the 
Rgveda describes this. 
 
"Those born together were divided in two forms." Rgveda 1.62.7 

 
Opposite forms can have two meanings, matter and antimatter, 

or positive and negative electric charge. A positively charged 
particle attracts a negatively charged particle. Following verse 
describes this phenomenon. 
 
"Two women having opposite forms breastfeed each other's 
child." Rgveda 1.95.1 

 
Our universe is matter dominated. If matter and anti-matter are 

created together in same amount, then we should find equal 
amount of anti-matter. Why is it that we don't find much evidence 
of anti-matter as far as we can observe. Are remote parts of the 
universe anti-matter dominated? Did matter and anti-matter 
somehow get segregated in different corners of the universe. 
Scientists do not think so. Scientists believe that when universe 
was very young, for some reason a small excess of matter over 
anti-matter was generated. As matter and anti-matter annihilated 
each other, this small excess remained, and that small excess is our 
universe. The Vedas take a different view. According to the Vedas 
matter and energy are constantly being created at the surface 

 

 176



 

of the universe, and there is an imbalance in their creation. Matter and 
anti-matter continually annihilate each-other and the small excess of 
matter has accumulated over the age of the universe. Following verses 
describe the annihilation of anti-matter. 
 

"Indra killed all the female servants of black origin." 
Rgveda 2.20.7 

 

"Everyday Indra removed half of the people, similar to the other half 
but black in color, born in his house."      Rgveda 6.47.21 

 

Indra is considered responsible for killing of black people in the 
Rgveda. As matter and anti-matter are attracted towards each other 
due to opposite nature of electric charge resulting in annihilation, 
electric force is indeed responsible for this phenomenon. The Rgveda 
contains a beautiful dialogue between a particle and its anti-particle in 
the tenth book. The particle is represented as a brother and its anti-
particle as his twin sister. 

15.2: Yama and Yami 
 

Yama is depicted as the god of death in the popular form of 
Hinduism. His form is very different in the Vedas. 

 

Rgveda 10.10 Sage: 1,3,5,7,9,11,13 - Yami, rest - Yama; 
Deity:1,3,5,7,9,11,13 - Yama, rest - Yami; Metre: Tristupa, 13 

- 
Viratasthana 

• 

 

1. Yami: I want to choose my friend (Yama) as my husband. He has 
entered the foaming ocean of youth. Now I am mature to give birth, 
and I want you to establish in my womb your father s grandson. 

 

 177



 

2. Yama: Your friend (Yama) does not want this kind of 
friendship, because own sister is not suitable (for marriage). Great 
brave sons of Asuras, who hold the heavens, see everything. 
3. Yami: Though for a mortal this friendship is unsuitable, the 
immortals do want this contact. You should fall in love with me, 
and join with my body as a virile husband. 
4. Yama: We have never done this before. We speak truth, we 
never spoke lies. Gandharva and young woman in Apah are our 
navel, and we have close relationship. 
5. Yami: All-pervading Tvasta has made us couples in womb 
itself. No one can break his laws. Earth and Heaven know our 
relationship. 
6. Yama: Who knows about the first day, who has seen it, who can 
tell? The abode of Mitra and Varuna has wide expanse. Why are 
you saying all this filled with imagination leading to downward 
fall? 
7. Yami: In Yami desire has arisen for Yama to sleep with him at 
same place. Like a wife joins her body with husband's, we should 
also do so. Let's work together like two wheels of a chariot. 
8. Yama: The spies of gods who move around here, (they) don't 
stop anywhere, don't close their eyes even for a moment. Go with 
someone else and work together with him like two wheels of a 
chariot. 
9. Yami: Let the sun shine, days and nights fulfil our desires. Let's 
be couple like earth and heaven. Let Yami become Yama's 
wife. 
10. Yama: Those times will come later, when sisters will have 
unsuitable relationship with brothers. O beautiful, choose someone 
else as your husband, and hold him in your hands. 
11. Yami: What of the brother, whose sister is helpless. What of the 
sister, who can not alleviate the pain of the brother. Caught with 
desires I am saying so much to you, join your body with my body. 

 

 178



 

13. Yama: I will not join my body with your body. Who sleeps with 
his sister, (people) call (him) sinner. Enjoy with someone else. O 
lucky, your brother does not desire this relationship. 
14. Yami: You are a coward. I could not fathom your mind and heart. 
Does someone else hug you like a creeping plant goes around a tree or 
a rope binds a horse. 
15. Yama: Yami, you should also hug someone else like a creeping 
plant goes around a tree, that someone else also hug you. You should 
desire him, he should desire you, and you enjoy life with him. 

 

Yama means twin, and here one of the twins is called Yama and 
other his sister Yami. This beautiful dialogue, which is cited as 
prohibiting the union of siblings, is not about the illegitimate 
relationship at all. This is a dialogue between a particle and its anti-
particle. If they join together, they will change into radiation and 
material universe will not evolve. The Vedas are written from the 
viewpoint of an existing universe, and sages celebrate the important 
physical processes leading to the present state of the universe. The 
stress here is that the material universe has evolved due to one particle 
combining with another particle to generate a third particle and so on. 
This is why Yami is told to join with someone else, not her own anti-
particle. Verse two says that sons of Asuras see everything. Verse eight 
says that spies of gods don't stop anywhere and don't close their eyes 
even for a moment. Who are these sons of Asuras and spies of gods? In 
the Vedas Varuna is often called Asura. Varuna has earlier been 
identified as electron. Spies of Varuna are often mentioned in the 
Vedas. 
 

"Nobody can deceive the spies of Varuna."      Rgveda 6.67.5 
 

"Varuna's spies see everything by their thousand eyes." 
Atharvaveda 4.16.4 

 

 179



 

 

The electron keeps on sending virtual particles all around it to 
find out about its neighbors. In this way the electron keeps an eye 
on everything around it. These spies are called dogs in the 
Rgveda. 
In Rgveda 1.24 there is a beautiful prayer by a virtual particle Sunah 
Sepa to Varuna (electron) asking Varuna to free him. This prayer 
becomes the basis of a long story in Aitareya Brahmana 7.3.1-6. 
King Hariscandra had one hundred wives, but he had no son. He 
prayed to Varuna for a son and promised to sacrifice him. Varuna 
granted his wish and soon his son Rohita was bom. Varuna asked 
Hariscandra to sacrifice his son Rohita. Hariscandra said that an 
animal becomes eligible for sacrifice when it is ten days old. He 
would sacrifice Rohita when he became ten days old. Varuna said 
let it be so. When Rohita was ten days old, then Varuna reminded 
Hariscandra again. Hariscandra said that an animal is sacrificed 
when it has teeth. He would sacrifice Rohita when he had teeth. 
Varuna said let it be so. Varuna reminded Hariscandra again after 
Rohita had teeth. Hariscandra said that an animal is sacrificed when 
its first set of teeth fall. He would sacrifice Rohita when his teeth 
fell. Varuna said let it be so. In this way Varuna kept reminding him 
and he kept postponing the sacrifice of his son Rohita. When Rohita 
came to know of his father's promise to sacrifice him, he left home 
and started living in a forest. Varuna became angry and inflicted 
Hariscandra with dropsy disease. Upon hearing this Rohita wanted 
to return, but Indra stopped him several times. In forest Rohita met 
sage Ajigarta dying with hunger and thirst. Ajigarta had three sons, 
Sunah Puccha, Sunah Sepa and Sunolangula. Rohita said that he 
would buy one of his sons for one hundred cows and sacrifice him 
to fulfil the promise made to Varuna. Ajigarta said that the eldest 
son is the dearest to him, and his wife said that the youngest son is 
the dearest to her. So they sold Sunah Sepa to Rohita. Varuna 
agreed to the sacrifice of Sunah Sepa in place of Rohita. When 
nobody was found willing to tie Sunah Sepa to a post for sacrifice, 

 180



 

 

his selfish father Ajigarta agreed to do so for one hundred cows. 
Sunah Sepa was tied to the post from head to toe. When nobody was 
found willing to sacrifice Sunah Sepa, his selfish father Ajigarta 
agreed to do so for one hundred cows. At this point Sunah Sepa 
started to pray to gods by the mantras in Rgveda 1.24-30. 

very happy to hear his prayers and released him. In the 
post-vedic literature we find the development of minor themes of the 
Rgveda in long captivating tales. There is a beautiful dialogue 
between the spy of the gods and the guardians of cows in the tenth 
book of the Rgveda and this is the subject of our further investigation. 

15.3: Sarama and Pani 
 

Panis are described as the mighty enemies of Indra. They are hiding 
the cows, which Indra desires to obtain. Indra sends Sarama to 
negotiate on his behalf. 

 

Rgveda 10.108 Sage: 2,4,6,8,10,11 - Devasuni Sarama, rest - Panis; 
Deity: 2,4,6,8,10,11 - Panis, rest - Devasuni Sarama; Metre: 

Tristupa 

1. Pani: Sarama, you have come here with what desires? The road 
leading here is very long. What is your aim in this? How did you 
spend the night? How did you cross the rivers? 
2. Sarama: I am the messenger of Indra, and I am roaming under his 
wishes. I want your great treasures. From the fear of all-transgressing 
(Indra), that (river) protected me. Thus I crossed the river. 
3. Pani: O Sarama, what does Indra look like, what is his vision, 
yon nave come so far away becoming his messenger. (Panis talk 
among themselves) If (Sarama) becomes our friend, (we) uphold  
and let her become the owner of cowherds. 

 181



 

5. Sarama: I don't know of him being beaten, he beats everyone, 
becoming whose messenger I have come from far away. O Panis, 
flowing deep currents can't hide him, you will certainly be lying on 
the ground killed by Indra. 
6. Pani: O lucky Sarama, desiring these cows you have reached the 
edges of heaven, how can anyone let them go without a war, and 
our weapons are also very sharp. 
7. Sarama: O Panis, you don't talk like good armies. Though (you) 
sinners' bodies can't be wounded, and the roads leading here are 
invincible, in either case Brhaspati won't let you live happily. 
8. Pani: Our treasure is rooted in rock and is full of cows, horses 
and other riches. These great protector Panis protect these treasures. 
You have come to this suspenseful place in vain. 
9. Sarama: Soma-drunk Navagva, Angirasa and Ayasya sages will 
come here. They will divide the cows. Therefore you should 
abandon these great-sounding talks. 
10. Pani: O Sarama, looks like you have come here forced by the 
gods. Let's make you our sister. Don't go back. O lucky, we will 
even give you a part of our cowherd. 
11. Sarama: I don't know brotherhood or sisterhood. Indra and 
dreadful Angirasa know that. They sent me desiring the cows, so I 
have come. Therefore go far away from here. 
12. Sarama: O Panis, go far away from here. Cows go upward by 
Rta. Brhaspati, Soma, Gravana, Vipras and sages have come to 
know these very secretly hidden treasures. 

 
Sarama is called DevasunI meaning bitch of the gods in the 

Rgveda. If there is still any confusion left about Sarama being a 
dog, Rgveda 10.14.10 says that Sarameya, children of Sarama, are 
two dogs with four eyes. Obviously, the dialogue is meaningless, if 
you don't know what the Vedas are about. Dogs can not talk to 
human beings, but this has not prevented proponents of the Aryan 
Invasion Theory to make a nice tale 

 

 182



 

 

about the pastoral culture of Aryans. Cows of Aryans have been 
stolen by Panis. They send Sarama to find out about the stolen cows. 
She finds out the cows and asks Panis to part with them, but they 
refuse. Then Indra goes and recovers the cows. Actually this dialogue 
is not about cows and dogs. 

First few verses tell that Sarama has traveled very far to find the 
cows, and in verse five it is made clear that she has reached all the 
way to the edge of the heaven. The edge of the heaven is the boundary 
of the universe. This phenomenon is taking place at the very edge of 
the universe. There is no indication in this dialogue that cows have 
been stolen by Panis. They own the cows and Indra, Brhaspati and 
other sages want those cows. Panis are very strong enemies. Reader 
should recall that the forces of expansion and contraction are in a very 
delicate balance. Indra indeed has very strong enemies to defeat. Panis 
are hiding cows, horses and other riches in rocks. We have also seen 
that the boundary of the universe is called mountain in the Vedas. 
What lies beyond this boundary is thus rooted in rock. Cows, horses 
and other riches that Sarama wants, have not manifested yet. They 
will, once the universe expands further, and therefore Brhaspati knows 
about the secretly hidden treasure. Cows and horses are the 
fundamental particles that will be created once the universe expands 
further. Thus we find that this dialogue between Sarama and Panis is 
another way of representing the creation of matter and energy due to 
expansion of the universe. This is the most crucial point of the Vedic 
cosmology, and therefore it is told again and again in various ways. In 
this dialogue Sarama is made messenger of Indra. Electric force acts 
by the exchange of virtual particles, and thus virtual particles can be 
considered the forerunners of electric force. At this stage one question 
arises about Panis. Are they supposed to be same as Vrtra? The 
declaration of Panis and Vrtra in the Rgveda does not warrant this 
conclusion. Both are opposed to expansion of the universe. Vitra has 
been identified as surface tension of the universe, which 

 183



 

 

opposes the expansion. Another force that opposes the expansion is 
the force of gravitation. Further research is needed to verify 
whether Panis represent force of gravitation. Verses eight and 
eleven tell that sages are also involved in this cosmic game of 
creation. What is the role of the sages? What do they represent? We 
will take up the discussion of the sages in the next chapter. 

 184



 

"Such, in outline, but even more purposeless, more void of meaning, is the 
world which science presents for our belief. Amid such a world, if 
anywhere, our ideals henceforward must find a home. All the labors of the 
ages, all the devotion, all the inspirations, all the brightness of human 
genius, are destined to extinction." 

- Bertrand Russell 
 

16. Seven Sages 

Verses of the Vedas are preceded by the description of sages, deities 
and metres. There are two major definitions of the Vedic sages. 
Nirukta 2.11 says that sage is because of seeing. The verses have been 
realized by sages during deep meditation. On the other hand, Rgveda 
Sarvanukramani 2.4 says that who speaks the verse is the sage of that 
verse. By generalizing this definition rivers, serpents and birds are 
considered sages as well, because dialogues have been spoken by 
them. It is obvious then that the actual sage of those verses is someone 
else who has chosen to make animals or inanimate objects speakers. 
There are several problems in accepting the given names of sages as 
the composer of the respective verses. Some verses are repeated in the 
Vedas, and verses are ascribed to different sages at different places. 

 185



 

Many times more than one sage are associated with one verse. 
Sometimes the number of sages for the same verse goes to 
hundred (Rgveda 9.66). In some cases it is obvious that the names 
of sages are not of actual people, but they are symbolic 
representations of the ideas conveyed by the mantras. For example 
verses of Yajurveda 34.1-6 end with "tanme manah 
Sivasankalpamastu" meaning let my mind be of good intentions. 
Sage of these verses is Sivasankalpa meaning good intention. 
Sometimes gods themselves become sages for some verses. Agni 
is the sage as well as deity of Rgveda 10.140. Thus it stands to 
reason that the names of sages are symbolic. I am going to take an 
extreme position by stating that none of the sages mentioned in the 
Vedas were actual people. Actual sages have not left their names, 
and all of the names of the sages found in the Vedas have a precise 
scientific meaning. This means that Vasistha, Visvamitra and 
names of other famous sages are not names of actual people. If this 
is the case, then how are we going to find out the actual meaning 
behind sages? Our biggest clue is the name itself, because every 
word in the Vedas has an etymological meaning. Furthermore, 
there are description of sages scattered in the Vedas. Hopefully, 
wise sages have left enough clues to make an unambiguous 
identification. With this objective in mind I will describe a 
beautiful hymn related to the birth of Vasistha. 

16.1: Vasistha 
 

 
Books two to eight of the Rgveda are considered family books, 
as each book is written by a sage and his family members. 
Authors of these seven books of the Rgveda are known as seven 
sages. Seventh book of the Rgveda is written by Vasistha and his 
family members. The description of Vasistha and his sons 
provides vital clues about the identification of sage Vasistha. 

 

 186



 

 

Rgveda 7.33 
Sage: 1-9 - Maitravaruni Vasistha, 10-14 - sons of Vasistha: 

Deity: 1-9 - Sons of Vasistha or Indra, 10-14 - Vasistha; 
Metre: Tristupa 

1. (Indra says) Whitish, having braided hair on right side, living 
wisely have pleased me. Rising from the seat I told men that 
Vasisthas don't go far from me. 
2. Brought ferocious Indra, who drinks from Soma vessel, from very 
far away. Indra chose Vasisthas over Soma prepared by Vayata 
Pasdyumna. 
3. Which Sindhu was crossed in this way? Which Bheda was killed 
in this way? O Vasisthas, in this way which Sudasa did Indra protect 
by your hymns in the battle often kings? 
4. O men, from your Brahma our forefathers get satisfaction, let the 
axles do not fail. O Vasisthas, hold strength in Indra by the loud 
sound in Sakkari. 
5. Thirsty, surrounded and seeking help, (Vasisthas) praised (Indra) 
in the battle of ten kings like heaven. Indra heard the prayers of 
Vasistha and created wide region for Trtsus. 
6. Like the rods for prodding cows, Bharatas were small and 
divided. Vasistha became the town of Trtsus, and Trtsus' settlement 
began to extend. 
7. Three create seed in Bhuvanas, three are the offsprings of Arya 
who stay in front of light. Three are the Dharmas which serve Usas, 
Vasisthas know them all. 
8. O Vasisthas, your greatness is spread like sun's light, is deep like 
ocean,'has speed like air. Your hymns can not be matched by 
anyone. 
9. From the knowledge of the mysteries of heart, they walk among 
thousand twigs. Weaving that enclosure by Yama, Vasisthas sit 
among the Apsaras. 
10. Vasistha, Mitra and Varuna saw you radiating electric light, that 
was your one birth when Agastya held you in place. 

 187



 

11. Vasistha, you are son of Mitra and Varuna. O Brahmana, you 
are born from the mind of Urvasi. By heavenly hymns drop (of 
semen) fell, all the gods held you in lotus. 
12. He has the knowledge of both. He gives thousands or 
everything. Weaving that enclosure by Yama, Vasistha was born 
from Apsara. 
13. Born in Satra, instigated by hymns (they) dropped seed in a 
vessel simultaneously. In the middle "Mana" manifested, from that 
sage Vasistha was born. 
14. Offering verses, offering chants, carrying Gravana (stone), he is 
speaking. Vasistha is coming. Offer him respect with warm 
feelings. 

 
Vasistha means a place to live and is derived from root "Vas" 

meaning to live. In verse six, Vasistha is referred to as a town 
(Pura) for Trtsus. The question is what is the scale of Vasistha's 
extent? Is it atomic level or cosmological level? In the first verse 
Vasisthas are described as having white color. White color has two 
possible connotations. It either represents matter as opposed to 
anti-matter, or it represents positive charge as opposed to negative 
charge. Here I will choose it to mean that Vasisthas are positively 
charged. Same verse also describes Vasisthas as having braided 
hair on right side. This could represent spin of atomic particles. 
Indra says that Vasisthas can not go far from him, which means 
that being positively charged Vasisthas give rise to electric force, 
and thus Indra is always near them. Second verse enforces the idea 
of Vasisthas having electric charge by saying that Vasisthas carry 
Soma. 

Verse three is a very important verse as it talks about the 
famous battle of Sudasa and ten kings. Every historian believes it 
to be a historical battle, and many of them relate it to the victory of 
Aryans over Dravidians. Sudasa means a good Dasa, and Dasas 
are supposed to be Dravidians. So if this was a battle, it would 
mean a victory of Dravidians over Aryans. However this was not 

 

 188



 

  

a historical battle at all. The verse asks which Sudasa was protected 
by Indra? Certainly Sudasa can not be a proper name if it is preceded 
by which. 

Verses ten to thirteen are important in identifying Vasistha. 
Vasistha is born from Apsara. Apsara means flowing from Apah. 
Thus Apsara means the electric field surrounding the charged 
particles. One of the Apsaras is Urvasi, mother of Vasistha. 
Obviously Vedic scientists gave different names to electric fields 
associated with different charged particles. Verse eleven says that 
Mitra and Varuna are fathers of Vasistha. Full name of Vasistha is 
Maitravaruni Vasistha, where Maitravaruni means son of Mitra and 
Varuna. This is certainly impossible if Vasistha was a human sage. 
Having identified Mitra as proton, Varuna as electron and Vasistha as 
a place to live, it is tempting to identify Vasistha as atomic nucleus or 
atom. Atomic nucleus fits the description exactly as Vasistha has 
white color and atomic nucleus is positively charged. Urvasi can then 
be identified as the electric field inside the atom. Mana is derived 
from root "ma" to measure. Creation of Vasistha from Mana signifies 
that size of nucleus is not arbitrary, but well measured depending on 
the strength of atomic forces. Another important point is that Agastya 
holds Vasistha. As the reader will recall, Agastya means fixed, not 
moving. Atomic nucleus is also fixed relative to the electrons 
surrounding it. Nucleus is very heavy compared to electrons, and for 
this reason is very immobile compared to electrons. Thus I see a very 
good match between properties of Vasistha and atomic nucleus. 
Another strong corroboration comes from prayers by sage Vasistha to 
Varuna. 
 

"When will I be inside Varuna?" Rgveda 7.86.2 

We will live inside Varuna sinless." Rgveda 7.87.7 

 189



 

 

As the atomic nucleus is surrounded by electron cloud, these 
verses make exact sense. The prayers of Vasistha and his family 
members are compiled in the seventh book of the Rgveda. One 
prominent feature of this book is that sages are asking for good 
and beautiful homes. If seven family books of the Rgveda are 
arranged according to some important chronological markers, then 
this book represents the era when atomic nuclei started to be 
formed. 

The birth of Vasistha is a very important event in the Vedic 
cosmology, and it is not surprising that it is described on a seal 
from the Indus Valley. Figure 16.1 shows this seal from Mohenjo-
daro (M-1186). This seal is known as "fig-deity" seal. Seven 
human figurines in the bottom row represent the seven sages of the 
Rgveda. Human figurine inside the jar is sage Vasistha. According 
to Rgveda 7.33.13 Vasistha was born in a vessel. Human figurine 
outside the jar is sage Agastya. Rgveda 7.33.10 describes Agastya 
as holding Vasistha in place. Fish sign represents Mitra and 
Varuna. Mitra and Varuna oversee the universe without blinking 
their eyes, and fish is also known as keeping its eyes open even 
while sleeping. 

In the Puranas sage Visvamitra becomes a bitter rival of sage 
Vasistha. However, there is no rivalry between these sages in the 
Rgveda. Sage of the second book is Grtsamada Bhargava 
Saunaka. Grtsamada means wise and happy, Bhargava is derived 
from root "Bhraj" to illuminate and Saunaka means related to dog. 
Dog represents virtual particles in the Vedas. Sage of the third 
book is Gathina Visvamitra. Gathina means singer and Visvamitra 
means friend of all. Sage of the fourth book is Vamadeva 
Gautama. Varna means lovely as well as left and Deva means god. 
Gau means cow and Tama means darkness. Sage of the fifth book 
is Atri. Atri means devourer, and is derived from root "AdM to eat. 
Sage of the sixth book is Bhardvaja. Bhardvaja means carrying 
high speed or strength. Sage of the eighth book is Kanva. Kanva is 
derived from root "Kan" meaning a minute particle. Further 

 190



 

 

Figure 16.1: Birth of Vasistha, a seal from Mohenjo-daro 
(M-1186) 

 191



 

 

research is needed to understand the scientific meaning of these 
sages. Having discussed the meaning of sages, it is now time to 
take a closer look at the Vedic concept of deities. 

 192



 

"I want to know how God created this world. I am not interested in 
this or that phenomenon, in the spectrum of this or that element. I 
want to know His thoughts, the rest are details." 

- Albert Einstein 
 

17. The Gods Gallery 

Hindus are often put on defensive by the followers of Semitic 
religions, who attack Hinduism for being polytheistic. Logically, 
monotheism has no superiority over polytheism. That being so, it 
should be kept in mind that Hindus worship different gods only as a 
manifestation of one god in different forms. Hinduism is a religion of 
symbols, and each symbol has a specific meaning. So far we have 
found the scientific meaning of several gods described in the Vedas. 
The Vedas describe the universe to be divided in three spaces, and 
accordingly gods also have a specific place in the universe. 

17.1: Three-fold Division 
 

Though a large number of gods are described in the Vedas, it was well 
understood that the gods are essentially three, one belonging to each 
space. 

 193



 

"There are three gods: Agni in earth, Vayu or Indra in atmosphere 
and Surya in heaven. Each one of them is known by various names 
depending on the different actions performed."      Nirukta 7.5 
 
"There are three gods: Agni in earth, Vayu in atmosphere and 
Surya in heaven." Katyayana in Sarvanukramani 2.8 
 
This view finds support from the following verse in the Rgveda 
itself. 
 
"Let Surya protect us from enemies in heaven, Vayu in 
atmosphere and Agni in earth." Rgveda 10.158.1 

 
These three gods are three major forms of energy, as matter in 

observer space, field in intermediate space and light in light space. 
Apart from this three-fold division of gods, the Vedas also talk about 
thirty three gods. 

17.2: Thirty Three Gods 
 
Sometimes Hindus are ridiculed for worshipping 330 million gods. 
The source of this misconception is the description of thirty three 
gods in the Vedas. 
 
"Thirty three gods take part in Yajna." Rgveda 1.139.11 
 
"Three more than thirty gods came to Yajna, knew our desires, 
and gave us two kinds of wealth." Rgveda 8.28.1 
 
"O three plus thirty gods, you are worthy of praise." Rgveda 8.30.2 

 
Who are these thirty three gods? The Vedas do not provide the 

names of these gods. In Satapatha Brahmana 14.6.9.3 they 
 

 194



 

have been described as eight Vasus, twelve Adityas, eleven 
Rudras, Indra and Prajapati. This is definitely wrong, and shows 
the loss of knowledge of the Vedic science. The Vedas are very 
clear about the division of gods. 
 

"O Asvins, come here to drink honey with three times eleven 
gods." Rgveda 1.34.11 
 

"There are eleven gods in heaven, eleven gods in atmosphere, 
and eleven gods in earth." Yajurveda 7.19 

 

Thus the description of thirty three gods has to satisfy the 
criteria of placing eleven gods in each of the three spaces, and 
obviously the Satapatha Brahmana fails there. It seems that the 
concept of thirty three gods is related to the geometry of the 
universe. In the Puranas a massive mix up takes place. The Vedas 
describe gods as of thirty three type (Koti). Koti has additional 
meaning of ten million. Due to this mix up in two meanings of the 
word Koti, number of gods suddenly jumped from thirty three to 
330 million. 

17.3: The Age of Puranas 

During the age of Puranas, massive upheaval took place in the 
depiction of Gods. The Puranas were written for the masses. On 
one hand the Puranas had to remain faithful to the Vedas, and on 
the other hand they had to keep ordinary people interested in 
Dharma. As a result the science of the Vedas was given the form 
of long engrossing tales of fight between gods and demons. Visnu 
took the place of supreme Godhead. Indra became his sub-
ordinate, and most of the time he had to worry about saving his 
kingdom from demons. Often demons became too powerful and 
expelled Indra and other gods from heaven. Vedic god Rudra 

 

 195



 

now became Siva. Five gods attained prominence during this 
period: Visnu, Siva, Sakti, Surya and Ganesa. Accordingly there 
were five main sects of Hindus, Vaisnava, Saiva, Sakta, Saura and 
Ganapatya. Gradually Ganapatya merged with Saiva, and Saura 
merged with Vaisnava leaving only three prominent sects 
Vaisnava, Saiva and Sakta. The process of coding of the 
knowledge started by the Vedas continued in the age of the 
Puranas. One example of this coding is the story of ten 
incarnations of Lord Visnu. 

17.4: Incarnations of Visnu 
 
The names of ten incarnations of Visnu are given in Mahabharata, 
Santi Parva. 
 
"Matsyah Kurmo Varahasca Narasimho atha Vamanah.  
Ramo Ramasca Ramasca Krsnah Kalkiti te dasa." 

 
 
Ten incarnations in chronological order are fish (Matsya), tortoise 

(Kurma), boar (Varaha), half man-half lion (Narasimha), dwarf 
(Vamana), Rama, Rama, Rama, Krsna and Kalki. Three Ramas in 
chronological order are Parasurama, Rama and Balarama. Ten 
incarnations of Lord Visnu tell the story of evolution and therefore it 
is important to keep them in chronological order. First incarnation is 
fish, which lives in water. Fish incarnation corresponds to the 
beginning of life in water. Second incarnation is tortoise, which can 
live in water and on land as well. Tortoise incarnation represents the 
transition of life from water to land. Third incarnation is boar, which 
lives on land. At this stage transition from water to land is complete. 
Next incarnation is half man-half lion representing the evolution of life 
forms with higher intelligence than previous ones, somewhere in 
between lower animals and man. Fifth incarnation is dwarf 

 

 196



 

 

incarnation. This is the stage of primates, who have not yet learnt to stand 
erect. Sixth incarnation is that of Parasurama. Parasu means an axe and 
Parasurama is depicted as holding an axe. This represents the primitive 
man of stone age who is using stone tools for hunting. Next incarnation is 
that of Lord Rama, who is represented as carrying bow and arrow. Now 
the human being is further down the road of civilization and using bow 
and arrow for hunting. Eighth incarnation is that of Balarama, who is 
represented as carrying plough on his shoulder. Now the man has settled 
down and is using agriculture for sustenance. Ninth incarnation is that of 
Krsna representing modem man. Tenth incarnation is that of yet to come 
Kalki. Kalki represents the future evolution of mankind. When Darwin 
proposed the theory of evolution, it was opposed tooth and nail by 
Church, and orthodox Christians still do not believe in evolution. In stark 
contrast to revealed religions, Hinduism has never indulged in 
suffocation of scientific thoughts, instead it has incorporated science in 
religion. Hinduism has been developed by intellectuals, who have coded 
the information for everyone to follow. While common Hindus follow 
their religion without knowing the real meaning behind the myths and 
customs, it is expected that Hindu intellectuals would know and preserve 
the scientific meaning for posterity. Unfortunately, a lot of scientific 
understanding has been lost due to a millenium of foreign rule. It is the 
duty of educated  Hindus to rediscover the lost knowledge and bring back 
the glory of Hinduism. Hinduism is not a set of mumbo-jumbo supposed 
to be delivered to a chosen fellow by God, but it is a result of concerted 
effort of generations of intellectual sages to discover the nature of 
ultimate reality. Sages deified scientific phenomena and Hindus are 
worshippers of science. To illustrate this point further, let's go to a city in 
central India, where Hindus come from all over India to worship time 
god. 

 197



 

 

17.5: Legend of Vikramaditya 
 
Ujjain is a city in the state of Madhya Pradesa. City of Ujjain was 
once ruled by the legendary king Vikramaditya. King 
Vikramaditya was known for his valor and impeccable justice. His 
court was adorned by nine famous courtiers called Navaratna (nine 
gems), who were great scholars in different fields of knowledge. 
Despite extensive effort, Vikramaditya can not be identified with 
any known historical king. Ujjain is famous for the temple of 
Mahakala. There is no other temple in India, where Mahakala is 
worshipped. 
Is there a meaning behind the legend of Vikramaditya and the 
worship of Mahakala? The real meaning is revealed by considering 
the meaning of these words. Vikramaditya is made by joining prefix 
"Vi" to words "Krama"and "Aditya". "Krama" means order, 
"Aditya" means sun and prefix "Vi" means deviation. Therefore, 
etymologically Vikramaditya means the change in the course of 
sun. What is significant is Ujjain is located on the tropic of cancer. 
Thus, sun comes to Ujjain during its northward journey, changes its 
course, and starts its southward journey. Vikramaditya is sun itself 
changing its journey at Ujjain. Nine gems in the court of 
Vikramaditya are nine planets of Solar system. Mahakala is made 
by joining words Maha, great, and Kala, time. Thus Mahakala 
means Time the great. Ujjain was known as Ujjayini in ancient 
times and was the capital of ancient empire Avanti. Ujjayini was 
the center of Indian civilization for several centuries and famous for 
its astronomical observatory. Ujjayini was equivalent of Greenwich, 
from where time was synchronized all over India and even abroad. 
New day commenced when it was six A.M. in Ujjayini. When it is 
six in the morning in Ujjain, it is midnight in Britain. It is from this 
ancient system of changing date in the morning in Ujjain that 
changing date at midnight has been arrived at. It is little strange to 
change the date when everyone is sleeping. As time was 
synchronized in a large part of the world 

 198



 

according to Ujjayini standard time, it was only natural to designate 
the god of Ujjain as god time himself, and therefore the name 
Mahakala, Time the great. Mahakala is often identified with Lord 
Siva, but there are no strong reasons to do so. 

The rise and fall of Hinduism is connected to the rise and fall of 
science, and scientists everywhere in the world are following the spirit 
of Hinduism without even realizing it. The spirit of Hinduism is logic 
and skepticism, and with this skepticism in mind we are going to take 
a closer look at the most accepted el of the universe, the Big Bang 
model. 

 

 199



 
 

 200



 

"I can live with doubt and uncertainty. I think it's much more 
interesting to live not knowing than to have answers which might be 

wrong." 
 - Richard Feynman 

18: Whither Big Bang? 

Every ancient civilization believed in an egg-shaped universe, which 
was based on the Vedic cosmology. Later due to the confusion of Prthivi 
(observer space) with earth a geocentric model of the universe 
developed. With Christianity adopting this idea, earth and human beings 
received a favorite place in God's scheme of things. Church not only 
believed in these ideas, but persecuted anyone who dared to speak 
against these ideas. Following the rise of Church to power a long dark 
age commenced. Modern science had a difficult birth in the cradle of 
christianity. Scientists were persecuted and burnt for formulating 
scientific theories, which Church perceived to be against its theory of 
creation. It is not a coincidence that modem science is against the idea of 
God and  anything special about earth and human beings. In India this 
type of conflict never arose. Hinduism was raised on the foundation of 
science and freedom of inquiry. There 

 201



 

 

is not a single incident of a scientist being persecuted by religious 
authorities in India. 

The challenge to Geocentric cosmology came in 1543, when 
Copernicus made a bold proposition that earth may not be at the 
center of the universe and may be rotating around Sun. Science 
never looked back after that. Kepler developed the idea further, 
based on which Newton developed the theory of gravitation. In 1915 
Einstein generalized the theory of gravitation and provided the 
framework of modern cosmologies. In 1929 Hubble published his 
results describing the recession of galaxies. Hubble observed a 
simple relation between the recession velocity of a galaxy and its 
distance from earth. The day of the Big Bang Cosmology had 
arrived. 

18.1: Big Bang Cosmology 
 
In the Big Bang model the universe starts with a gigantic explosion, 
before which all the mass-energy of the universe was concentrated 
in a point of singularity. Space was created with this explosion and 
is expanding according to Hubble's law. Hubble's law states that 
recession velocity of a galaxy relative to another galaxy is 
proportional to the distance separating them. There is an implicit 
assumption that the universe is same in all direction. The universe is 
symmetric around each point in the universe, and it looks same from 
anywhere in the universe. There are no edges of the universe and 
there is no center of the universe in this model. This is illustrated by 
means of an expanding balloon. The universe is considered a four-
dimensional analogue of the surface of a balloon, on which each 
point is moving away from other point. The Big Bang model of the 
universe is illustrated is Figure 18.1. The universe is a four-
dimensional analogue of the surface of a sphere. There is no inside 
or outside of this surface as this surface is all that exists. 

 202



 

203
 



 

How did scientists figure out that the universe is like the surface 
of a sphere? We find the answer in the bible of cosmology, 
Gravitation[l]. Prevailing scientific wisdom demands from the 
universe that it be of uniform density, isotropic, and closed. First 
two requirements mean that the universe should be same 
everywhere and third requirement means that the universe should 
have no boundary. The surface of a sphere satisfies all these 
requirements. The questions like "What is inside the sphere" and 
"What is outside the sphere" are considered meaningless as the 
surface of the sphere is the whole universe, and there is no outside 
or inside. The bible of cosmology further says that excursion off the 
sphere is physically meaningless and is forbidden. We should note 
that it is one thing to demand from the universe to be what scientists 
consider elegant, and it is another thing for the universe to oblige the 
scientists by being so. The ultimate test for any theory of cosmology 
is the universe itself. Any theory must not contradict the universe, 
and we will see shortly that the Big Bang Cosmology has failed in 
several respects. Failures of the Big Bang Cosmology were apparent 
from the beginning itself, and soon after its birth another rival 
cosmology was developed to explain the universe better. 

18.2: Steady State Cosmology 
 
In 1948 a rival cosmology named Steady State Cosmology was 
formulated by Hermann Bondi, Fred Hoyle and Thomas Gold. The 
Steady State Cosmology differed from the Big Bang Cosmology 
in several respects. The universe is considered without a beginning 
and a small amount of matter (hydrogen atom to maintain charge 
neutrality) is assumed to be created continuously between the 
galaxies. The universe is considered expanding w both models and 
looks same from every point in the universe. The important 
difference being that in the Big Bang Cosmology 

 

 204



 

 

universe keeps changing with time as it is growing bigger, while in 
the Steady State Cosmology the universe is always the same, 
presumably an infinite universe expanding and remaining infinite.
For nearly two decades the controversy raged on and finally in 1965 
scientific opinion turned in the favor of the Big Bang Cosmology 
after the discovery of the cosmic background radiation. 

Currently the the Big Bang model is the most widely accepted 
model of the evolution of the universe. However, the Big Bang 
model has a number of difficulties, some of which are supposed to be 
overcome using inflation like flatness and horizon problems. Some 
difficulties still remain like problems of singularity, dark matter, 
antimatter, age of the universe, evolution of galaxies, monopole, 
entropy and rotation. Let's have a look at these problems. 

18.3: Singularity Problem 
 

The Big Bang model is based on the observation that universe is 
expanding. If we look backward in time, then universe will look 
smaller in extent, and if we extrapolate it all the way to the 
beginning of the universe, then the universe will become a point. 
What happens to the mass-energy of the universe? One of the most 
sacred principles of physics is that mass-energy is always conserved. 
Mass-energy can neither be created nor be destroyed. The 
conservation principle then demands that in the beginning all the 
mass-energy of the universe was concentrated in a point. The point 
is called a singularity because its mass-energy density is infinite. In 
the Big Bang model there is a singularity at the beginning of the 
universe, and if there is sufficient mass-energy to close the universe, 
universe will end in another singularity. Though scientists don't like 
singularities, there is no way to avoid it currently. Scientists hope 
that a unified theory of quantum 

 205



 

 

mechanics and gravity will be able to solve the singularity problem. 
The attempts to avoid the singularity at the beginning of universe 
have not been successful so far. 

18.4: Horizon Problem 
 
Horizon problem was pointed out by Misner in 1969[2]. The 

problem is related to causal connectivity. According to relativity no 
signal can travel faster than the speed of light. The universe is about 
15 billion years old according to modern physics, so we have a 
horizon around us of 15 billion light years. We can not receive any 
signal from a point beyond this horizon. If we look at an object 10 
billion light years away, and then look at another object 10 billion 
light years away in the opposite direction, we find that they have 
similar environment. They have same expansion rate and same 
cosmic background radiation temperature. These two objects are 
however separated by a distance of 20 billion light years meaning 
that they are beyond the horizon of each other. Thus no signal has 
ever reached from one to other. In the language of modern science 
these two objects have never been causally connected. How did the 
regions in space not causally connected get homogenized? If the 
universe started with a gigantic explosion, parts of it should show 
randomness characteristic of an explosion. Why is the universe so 
uniform then? This is the question posed by Horizon problem. 

An idea called "inflation" is used to find a way out of this problem, 
and the Big Bang models using this idea are called inflationary Big 
Bang models. According to inflationary model, the universe started 
with the Big Bang, which made the universe chaotic and 
inhomogeneous, but it was smoothed out later. Inflation is used to 
provide this smoothening effect in the Big Bang model. It should be 
kept in mind that there is no proof that ,     inflation ever happened. 
The inflation theory can not be tested 

 206



 

 

18.5: Flatness Problem 
 
 
Flatness problem was pointed out by Dickein 1969[2]. It is related 
to omega, the ratio of average density of matter in the universe to 
critical density. Average density of matter is what is observed, and 
critical density of matter is the density needed to close the 
universe. If the density of matter is greater than critical density, 
universe will not keep expanding for ever, instead it will start 
contracting after a certain time, and universe will finish in a point 
of singularity. The measured value of omega is close to one. The 
problem is that, as the universe is between 10-20 billion years old 
in Big-Bang model, the omega at Big Bang must have been very 
close to one, up to 59 decimal points! We can understand the 
Flatness problem by an analogy of a stone thrown in space from 
earth. If the stone has sufficient kinetic energy, it will escape the 
gravitational pull of earth and will never come back. If the stone 
does not have sufficient kinetic energy, it will fall back on earth. 
Important point here is that kinetic energy and potential energy 
keep changing with time. In the first case ratio of potential energy 
to kinetic energy becomes zero, and in the later case it becomes 
infinity. Omega can also be defined as the ratio of potential 
energy to the kinetic energy. If omega were even slightly greater
than or less than one, by now omega would be either close to zero 
or infinity. If omega were slightly greater than one, universe 
would have collapsed long time back. If it is close to one now, it 
has always been close to one, but why would the universe start 
with the value of omega so close to one. After all science does not 
believe in God who would set the value of Omega In exactly one. 
Inflation is used to solve this problem. Inflation drives omega to 
one regardless of its value before inflation takes 

 207



 

18.6: Age Problem 
 
The age of the universe lies between 7 and 20 billion years 
depending on the value of hubble constant and other factors. The 
value of hubble constant itself is a matter of raging controversy. 
Different methods of measurement provide different values of the 
hubble constant. The age of oldest stars is between 13 and 17 
billion years. The age of the elements is between 12 to 16 billion 
years. This brings a peculiar situation that universe may be younger 
than its constituents. Physicists favor the lowest value of hubble 
constant to avoid the age problem. However, there is no scientific 
basis for this preference. 

18.7: Monopole Problem 
 
Electricity and magnetism are intimately connected. Positive and 
negative electric charges are examples of electric monopoles, which 
can exist independently. On the other hand, magnetic monopole 
does not exist. A magnet always has a south pole associated with a 
north pole. If you cut a magnet in two, you end up having two 
magnets, each magnet having two poles. Why is it that electric 
monoples can exist, but magnetic monopoles can not? Are 
magnetic monopoles forbidden by nature? Scientists do not think 
so. Grand unified theories in conjunction with the Big Bang model 
predict the existence of magnetic monopoles. The mass of the 
monopole should be approximately ten million billion billion times 
that of the proton. New inflation theory predicts that there are many 
universes like several bubbles, and each universe contains one 
monopole. The search for monopoles has not been successful so 
far. If monopoles should exist, why are not they found? This is the 
question posed by the monopole problem. 

 

 208



 

18.8: Entropy Problem 
 
 

The entropy problem was formulated by Roger Penrose in 1974[2]. 
Entropy is a measure of disorder. Second law of thermodynamics 
tells us that entropy of the universe always keeps on increasing. If 
the universe started with a Big Bang, entropy of the universe should 
be much larger than it is observed right now. According to Penrose, 
the entropy in the early universe was extremely low. The universe 
began as an extremely ordered system. This is in direct contradiction 
with Big Bang model according to which the universe began with a 
gigantic explosion, and therefore the universe was very chaotic in the 
beginning.. 

18.9: Antimatter Problem 
 

As matter and antimatter are created and annihilated in pair. For 
every particle there exists an anti-particle, and when they come in 
contact, they annihilate each other. According to the standard Big 
Bang model, there should be same amount of matter and antimatter 
in the universe. However, our universe seems to be matter-
dominated. Where is the corresponding anti-matter? Are there other 
galaxies made of antimatter in far recesses of the universe? Scientists 
have found no evidence of antimatter-dominated regions in universe. 
Why is it that in a supposedly symmetric universe distribution of 
matter and antimatter is asymmetric? 

Considering that the Big Bang model has been in existence for 
70 years, and so many brilliant scientists have worked to solve these 
problems, why is it that problems facing the Big Bang model refuse 
to go away? Is the framework of the Big Bang model correct? The 
question to ask then is if not the Big Bang then what? Is there an 
alternative to the Big Bang? Only serious Challenger to the Big 
Bang model is the Steady State model, which 

 

 209



 

 

has fallen out of favor after the discovery of cosmic background 
radiation. In next chapter we will deliberate if the problems facing 
the Big Bang Cosmology can be solved by the Vedic Cosmology. 

 210



 

"We shall not cease from exploration 
And the end of all our exploring Will 

be to arrive where we started And 
know the place for the first time." - T. 

S. Eliot 
 

19. Vedic Cosmology 

So far in this book we have come across the cosmic egg several times. 
We know that the Vedic sages considered the universe to be egg-shaped 
and all ancient civilizations accepted the Vedic wisdom. Now is the 
time to deliberate why wise sages chose egg to represent the universe. 
Was it because of a homely feeling or was there a solid reasoning 
behind this? Did sages look at the universe from outside? This is an 
unlikely scenario. In most likelihood they came to this conclusion based 
on sound reasoning. 

19.1: The Cosmic Egg 

Ws have seen that modern scientists consider the universe to resemble the
surface of sphere, because they have reasons to 

 211



 

believe that universe is of uniform density, isotropic, and closed. 
What considerations led the sages to the representation of the 
universe as an egg? The answer to this question lies in the rotation 
of the universe. We have a clear statement to this effect in the 
Rgveda. 
 
"Which was born first and which later ? How were they born? Who 
knows O wise people? They hold the universe by their strength and 
always keep rotating like a wheel." 

Rgveda 1.185.1 
 
This mantra dedicated to the observer space and light space 

clearly states them as rotating. As the universe is the sum of two, 
the universe is also rotating. We have come across the notion that 
sages considered the universe to contain a primordial fluid, which 
they named "Salila". As the apparent meaning of Salila is water, 
rest of the world came to believe that the universe was filled with 
water in the beginning. If the sages considered the initial state of 
the universe to be a fluid, and they considered the universe to be 
rotating, the rotation will have an effect on the shape of the 
universe. If we rotate a spherical volume of fluid, the fluid takes 
the shape of a spheroid. It shrinks along the axis of rotation and 
expands perpendicular to it keeping its symmetry around the axis 
of rotation. If we look at an spheroid and think about a familiar 
object that looks like it, what do we come up with: surprise of 
surprises, an egg!!! 

19.2: Cakra of Visnu 
 
In Hindu myhtology, Lord Visnu is shown as holding a cakra 
(wheel) in his hand. I have identified Visnu as the universe, and 
that makes him same as Supreme being, because in Hinduism 
God is not different from the universe, Now we can understand 

 

 212



 

 

the symbolism behind the cakra. Cakra is the representation of the 
rotation of the universe. Lord Visnu is shown as having four 
hands. The four hidden dimensions of the universe are his four 
hands. Now we may ask, if the universe is rotating, will not the 
scientists know about it? 

19.3: Rotation of the Universe 
 

Almost everything in the universe is rotating including the 
particles, earth and galaxies. It is natural to ask if the universe is 
rotating as well. In the framework of standard Big Bang model the 
universe is not rotating, and this creates a problem as to why its 
constituents are rotating. The Big Bang model considers the 
universe to be isotropic, meaning there is no preferred direction in 
space. If universe is rotating, then it has an axis, which is a 
preferred direction. So finding a proof of rotation of the universe is 
the end of the Big Bang model. Let's examine the assumption of 
isotropy carefully. If the universe is isotropic, there can not be any 
distinction between left and right. This was the most sacred belief 
of scientists till 1956. That year two young scientists Tsung-Dao 
Lee and Chen Ning Yang published a scientific paper in which 
they claimed that parity, a measure of symmetry, might not be 
conserved in weak interactions. They proposed an experiment to 
test their hypothesis. There was an atmosphere of disbelief. 
Famous physicist Wolfgang Pauli, Nobel Laureate, known for his 
exclusion principle wrote a letter saying that he did not believe 
that the Lord is a weak left-hander. The experiment was conducted 
by a female physicist Chien Shung Wu a few months later and 
confirmed the argument of Lee and Yang. In 1957 Lee and Yang 
were awarded Nobel prize in physics for their discovery, and Wu 
received Wolf prize in Physics in 1978. Since then every 
experiment has confirmed that weak interaction makes a 
difference between left and right. 

 213



 

 

Let's take a close look at strong, electromagnetic and weak 
interactions. It is obvious that model of the universe should not 
contradict the nature of these interactions. Weak interaction has 
complete disregard for many conservation laws including parity. 
Parity violation means that nature distinguishes between left and 
right. The question is how can this happen in an isotropic universe? 
Let's ask another question: What is so special about weak 
interaction? Why is it that it does not obey conservation laws like 
other interactions? There indeed is something very special about 
weak interaction: its range of interaction. The range of 
electromagnetic and gravitational interaction is infinite. The range of 
strong interaction is 10-15 meters and that of weak interaction is 10-17 
meters. Weak interaction has the lowest range of all interactions. We 
can think of weak interaction as operating at such a subtle level 
where the rotation of the universe affects the conservation laws. It 
has been more than forty years since the discovery of parity 
violation, but cosmologists have not taken into account what particle 
physicists have proved. This is obviously an indirect proof of the 
rotation of universe. Should not there be a more direct proof of this? 
Will not it be obvious if the universe were rotating? Well, earth is 
also rotating, but we do not feel it. We will have to look for the 
effect of this rotation. If the universe is rotating, it can be rotating 
very slowly as universe is huge. In the beginning it may have been 
rotating faster. So is there a more direct proof of rotation of the 
universe? It turns out that we are just in luck. 

Borge Nodland of the University of Rochester and John P. 
Ralston of the University of Kansas have found evidence of 
preferred direction in the universe and published their results in 
Physical Review Letters[l]. Scientific American, July 97 published 
a one page report on their findings under the heading "Science and 
the Citizen". After three years of painstaking research, Nodland and 
Ralston have found that polarized light from galaxies shows 
evidence of rotation. The twisting of 

 214



 

 

polarized light is a well known phenomenon called Faraday effect. 
However, this rotational effect is on top of Faraday effect, and 
depends not only on the distance of the galaxy from us, but it depends 
upon the direction of galaxy as well. The rotational effect is strongest 
in the direction of earth-Sextans axis and is weakest in the direction 
perpendicular to it. Nodland and Ralston have ruled out the possibility 
that the effect is local. The effect is at a cosmological level as it 
depends upon the distance of the galaxy. 

The work of Nodland and Ralston has been challenged by other 
scientists, who think that the analysis is wrong. This is only expected 
as physicists are not going to abandon one of the their most cherished 
beliefs so easily. It must be backed up by further evidence. Meanwhile 
Nodland and Ralston have maintained the position that their analysis 
is correct. They have stated that their result can not be explained by 
conventional physics and the effect may be due to an unknown force 
or field or property of space. To me it is a direct proof of the rotation 
of the universe. Rotation of universe and continuous creation of matter 
and energy are two salient features of the Vedic cosmology. We have 
seen that the universe has the shape of an egg due to rotation, now is 
the time to discuss continuous creation, which will lead us to a way 
out of singularity. 

19.4: Universe without Singularity 
 

Universe started with an explosion according to the Big Bang model. 
At time equal to zero, all the mass-energy of the universe was 
concentrated in a point. This is certainly an unimaginable feat, as the 
universe is immense. According to Pauli's exclusion principle not even 
two electrons can occupy the same state, and here whole universe is 
considered to be inside a point. The Big Bang model does not give any 
clue as to why all the mass-energy of the universe should be there in 
the first place. This situation is 

 215



 

 

a direct result of the conservation of mass and energy, the most 
sacred principle of physics. Considering that the universe is 
expanding, extrapolating backward in time, the universe was as 
small as a point. As mass-energy of the universe must be 
conserved, all the mass-energy must have been there at time zero 
as well. We should note that conservation of mass-energy is 
violated in this case as well. This is equivalent to saying that all the 
mass-energy was created at time equal to zero. Mass-energy 
density of the universe was infinite at time equal to zero, which is 
called a point of singularity. 

Scientists have been trying to find a way out of singularity. Ed 
Tryon published a paper with the title "Is the universe a vacuum 
fluctuation?" in Nature, December 1973. Tryon, wondering about 
where all the mass-energy of the universe came from, proposed 
that it is due to a vacuum fluctuation. Uncertainty principle allows 
for creation of energy for a brief period of time. However, mass-
energy of the universe being so huge, this fluctuation can not 
remain for billions of years. Another important idea that Tryon 
came up with is that in fact there is no mass-energy in the universe. 
When scientists talk about mass-energy, they are overlooking an 
important form of energy, gravitational energy. Gravitation being 
an attractive force, gravitational energy is negative. What Tryon 
realized was that this negative form of energy exactly balanced 
positive form of energy, so that in effect total energy of the 
universe is zero. His brilliant idea has not however been developed 
in to a full-fledged cosmological model. 

Another related idea is that of inflation. Inflation proposes that 
the universe entered a state of false vacuum soon after the Big 
Bang, and during that time the universe expanded exponentially, 
much faster than observed Hubble rate, doubling in size every 1034

second. During inflation positive form of mass-energy was created 
to balance the negative gravitational energy. In effect there was no 
creation of mass-energy. For this reason Alan Guth, who proposed 
inflation theory, considers the universe 

 216



 

 

to be the ultimate free lunch. What Guth realized was there was no way 
to end the inflation period. A modification to inflation, called new 
inflation, is invoked to end the inflation, but this new theory is even 
more exotic. It proposes that there are many universes, one of which is 
our known. Inflation has not solved the singularity problem, as 
inflation only produces part of the mass-energy of the universe, and as 
long as even a tiny amount of mass-energy was present at time zero, 
singularity problem will be there. The Vedas tell us that at time zero 
there was no mass-energy in the universe. It was a complete void. 
Space, mass and energy are continuously being created. As universe 
had zero mass-energy at time equal to zero, the universe did not start 
with a singularity. 

19.5: Conservation of Space, Matter and Energy 
 

In the beginning of this century, Einstein proved the equivalence of 
matter and energy. Today the Vedas have returned to tell an even 
greater truth: equivalence of space, matter and energy. Space is no 
different from matter and energy. In the beginning there was no mass-
energy in the universe, because there was no space. Mass-energy is 
created due to expansion of the universe. The universe can not expand 
without creating mass-energy, and the universe can not contract 
without annihilating mass-energy. Thus the universe started with zero 
mass-energy and will end up with zero mass-energy as well. There 
was no singularity in the beginning and there will be no singularity at 
the end. If this is the case, then mass-energy is being created right now 
as the universe expanding. So should not scientists be witnessing this 
creation? Infact they are witnessing it right now, but have no clue as to 
what is it mat they are observing. I am talking about gamma-ray 
bursts. 

 217



 

 

19.6: Gamma-ray Bursts 
 
Scientific American, July 97 has an article on gamma-ray bursts on 
page 46. The article begins by stating that about three times a day 
our sky flashes with a powerful pulse of gamma rays. The origin of 
these gamma-ray bursts is a complete mystery. These bursts were 
discovered in 1973 and several theories were floated to explain this 
phenomenon. Black holes, supernovae or neutron stars were 
thought to be the sources of these bursts. Most accepted theory is 
that of binary neutron stars collapsing, but there are problems with 
this explanation. The gamma-ray bursts are intense, bulk of their 
radiation is in the range 100,000 to 1,000,000 electron volts 
implying a very hot source and its sources release more energy 
within minutes than sun will release in its entire lifetime. 
Astronomers believe that these bursts are coming from 
cosmological distances probably three to ten billion light years 
away. The sources of these bursts are distributed isotropically, that 
is their number is same in any direction. The question is why? Are 
we in the center of a large spherical shell over which the sources of 
these bursts are uniformly distributed? The idea of us being in the 
center of this shell is unnerving to the scientists, because center is a 
special position and science does not allow for us to be in a special 
position compared to any other point in the universe. 

We have seen that the Vedic scientists consider the creation of 
mass-energy to be taking place continuously at the surface of the 
universe. We have also seen that creation of mass-energy is related 
to the expansion of space. As the universe is huge now, its 
expansion will create immense radiation. As surface of the 
universe envelopes us from all directions, and this surface is far 
away from us, the gamma ray bursts will seem isotropic and seem 
to come from the outer reaches of the universe. What is most 
significant is that these gamma-ray bursts are taking place three 
times a day, and this is exactly the frequency at which creation of 

 218



 

mass-energy is taking place according to the Vedic scientists. Here are 
some verses from the Rgveda to this effect: 
 
"O Savita, give us wealth everyday three times a day." 

Rgveda 3.56.6 
 

"O Agni, we know you have wealth to give three times a day to 
mortals." Rgveda 7.11.3 
 

"O Soma, give us three times a day, what you have milked." 
Rgveda 9.86.18 

There is a concept called "Digdaha" related to this creation at the 
surface of the universe. Digdaha means fire at the boundaries, and refers 
to the immense radiation being generated at the ends of the universe. 
This creation of mass-energy and space is called Yajiia. Havana is 
performed three times a day because creation takes place three times a 
day. Without Yajiia there would be no universe, and it is for this reason 
that Yajiia is given so much importance in the Vedas. In the Brahmanas 
Visnu is equated to Yajiia again and again (Satapatha Brahmana 
1.1.2.13, 5.2.3.6, 5.4.5.1, Kausltaki Brahmana 4.2, 18.14). The reason 
being as the universe (Visnu) expands creation of mass-energy and 
space (Yajiia) takes place. Yajiia is also called Vitana meaning 
expanding, because Yajiia is related to the expansion of the universe. 
Following question is asked in the Vedas: 
 

"I ask you the remotest end of earth. I ask you what is the origin 
of universe." Rgveda 1.164.34, Yajurveda 23.61 
 
 

And the answer is given as, 
 
This attar is the remotest end of earth. This Yajna is the origin of 
universe.”    Rgveda 1.164.35, Yajurveda 23.62 

 

 219



 

Remotest end of the observer space is the boundary of the universe, 
and that is where the creation is taking place, therefore this boundary is 
considered the altar. Now we are in a position to piece together the 
evolution of the universe according to the 
Vedas. 

19.7: Evolution of the Universe 

Before the creation, there existed an ultimate reality beyond our 
conceptions of space, matter and time. The ultimate reality desired 
to create the universe. With this desire, the universe started as a 
small fluctuation creating a tiny region of space with a very small 
amount of mass-energy. In the beginning there was neither space 
nor mass-energy. The universe did not start with a Big Bang. There 
was no mass-energy available to create this Big Bang. When I talk 
about creation of mass-energy, it implies that it is accompanied by 
an equal amount of negative energy due to gravitation or other 
attractive forces. In effect, there is no creation, the total mass-
energy is always zero. Initially the forces of attraction and repulsion 
were in a very delicate balance. First fluctuation was not very 
successful, and the universe began to contract after an initial 
expansion. This contracting universe was called "Martanda". The 
forces of attraction and repulsion were then fine tuned and the 
universe started to expand again. This living universe was given the 
name "Vivasvana". Space and mass-energy are closely related. 
When the universe became of a certain size, there became sufficient 
energy available for the formation of the first pair of particle and its 
anti-particle. This first pair was given the name "Yama" or "Manu". 
With further expansion of the universe mass-energy of the universe 
kept increasing with the formation of more pairs of particles and 
anti-particles. Somewhere along the line universe separated in three 
spaces, observer, intermediate and light. Electric force was the 
major 

 

 220



 

force causing the expansion of the universe. In early universe surface 
tension of the universe was the most important force coristraining the 
expansion of the universe. The battle of these two forces was 
immortalized in the epic battle of Indra and Vrtra. The particles and 
anti-particles annihilated each other changing in radiation. This 
radiation was called Rudra. The radiation gave rise to radiation 
pressure, which pushed universe to expand. Radiation pressure was 
given the name Maruta, and its components were described as sons of 
Rudra. As the universe was expanding, it started to rotate as well. This 
rotation gave rise to parity violation resulting in the production of a 
small excess of matter over antimatter. This small excess of matter 
accumulated over the age of the universe making the universe matter 
dominated. The annihilation of anti-matter was represented as the 
slaying of dark people by Indra. The remnants of radiation from the 
early universe is observed as the cosmic background radiation, which 
was named Visa. 

As the universe started with zero matter and energy, the universe 
must have started cold, very cold. As the universe started to rotate, the 
shape of the universe changed to a spheroid or an egg. With the 
increase in mass-energy content, the gravitational pull also increased, 
which acted to slow down the expansion of the universe. The 
expansion rate and rotational velocity of the universe has been 
constantly changing during the evolution of the universe as the strength 
of the forces of expansion and contraction have kept changing. The 
universe started with zero expansion and rotational velocity, reached to 
a maximum, and men slowed down. We are currently somewhere in 
the later phase of expansion, when the expansion velocity and 
rotational velocity both are very low. As the universe is a spheroid, it 
has a center and an axis of rotation. The universe has an eccentricity, 
which is changing with time. Halfway through the evolution of the 
universe, the forces of expansion and contraction will come to  exact 
balance, bringing the universe to a complete halt, both 

 221



 

 

expansion and rotational velocity becoming zero. The universe at this 
point will become a perfect sphere. The later half of the evolution will 
then begin with the contraction of the universe and probably rotation 
of the universe in opposite direction. During this phase mass-energy 
of the universe will be gradually reduced. Finally universe will end 
where it began its journey with zero space, matter and energy. 
 
 
 
19.8: Trinity 
 
In Hinduism Brahma, Visnu and Mahesa form a trinity. Brahma is the 
creator of the universe, Visnu the protector and Mahesa the destroyer. 
Brahma means expansion, and expansion of the universe takes place 
with the creation of matter and energy, thus Brahma is creator. Visnu 
is the life-principle of the universe, who is not different from the 
universe, thus he is the protector. Mahesa or Mahadeva or Siva is 
Vedic god Rudra representing radiation. As radiation is the result of 
annihilation of particles, he is related to destruction. But what is 
annihilated is born again as another set of particles, and this dance of
creation and annihilation continues. This is the cosmic dance of Siva, 
and therefore he is called Nataraja, Lord of the dancers. With the 
Vedic framework in mind, we are in a position to solve the problems 
plaguing the Big Bang Model. 
 
 
 
19.9: Horizon Problem 
 
Horizon problem is related to causal connectivity. How did the
regions in space not causally connected get homogenized? If the
universe started with a Big Bang, it should be chaotic and
inhomogeneous. Inflation is used to provide a smoothening elect in the 
Big Bang model, but it can not be accepted as a proof, 

 222



 
 

unless it is proved that inflation ever took place. Otherwise, it can 
only be thought of as an ingenious device designed to hide the fatal 
flaws of the Big Bang Model. 

The Vedic model tells us that the expansion of the universe 
started smoothly and has been smooth ever since. The universe didn't 
start with an explosion. The expansion was very slow in the 
beginning. Thus all parts of the universe were in equilibrium in the 
beginning, and the expansion has been smooth ever since. Thus two 
parts of the universe, which are not causally connected today, were 
causally connected in the beginning for a long time, and it is no 
wonder that the universe looks so smooth. 

19.10: Flatness Problem 
 

The ratio of kinetic to gravitational energy in the universe is called 
omega. The measured value of omega is close to one. As the universe is 
between 7 to 20 billion years old in the Big Bang model, the omega at 
Big Bang must have been very close to one, up to 59 decimal points. If 
omega were even slightly greater than or less than one, by now omega 
would be either close to zero or infinity. Why was omega so close to 
one at the Big Bang? Stated in another way, why are the kinetic and 
gravitational energy in such a delicate balance? One possible 
explanation is the unverifiable Inflation. The Vedic model provides an 
elegant solution to flatness problem. 

Total energy of the universe is equal to zero. Total energy of the 
universe can be divided in positive energy and negative energy. 
Positive and negative energies balance each other. Forms of positive 
energy are mass-energy, kinetic energy and rotational energy, while 
forms of negative energy are gravitational energy and surface energy. 
At time zero, all forms of energy had zero value, and their values have 
changed during the course of evolution subject to the condition that 
total energy must be zero 

 

 223



 

 

at all times. Thus gravitational energy and kinetic energy will 
always remain in near balance. Kinetic energy and gravitational 
energy are not exactly equal though, because there are other forms 
of energy. In the beginning there was neither kinetic energy nor 
gravitational energy. As kinetic energy increased so did the 
gravitational energy. Net energy of the universe remains zero all the 
time, and thus omega always remains close to one. 

19.11: Age Problem 
 
The age of the universe lies between 7 and 20 billion years 
depending on the value of hubble constant and other factors. The 
value of hubble constant itself is a matter of raging controversy. The 
age of oldest stars is between 13 and 17 billion years. The age of the 
elements is between 12 to 16 billion years. This brings a peculiar 
situation that universe may be younger than its constituents. 
Physicists favor the lowest value of hubble constant to avoid the age 
problem. However, this choice is completely arbitrary. 

In the Vedic model, the universe began with zero space volume, 
zero mass-energy and zero hubble velocity. With the creation of 
matter-antimatter and their annihilation the hubble velocity 
increased gradually. As space expanded further the gravitational 
pull of mass-energy started to slow down the expansion. Thus the 
hubble velocity reached a maximum value, and then started to 
decrease slowly. In the Vedic model, a condition like that of the Big 
Bang emerges when the hubble velocity reaches a maximum. 
However, by this time the universe is considerably old. In the 
standard Big Bang model, probably more than half of the age of the 
universe is not even being looked into. Once the first half of the 
expansion is taken into account, the age of the universe may more 
than double. This may solve the age problem. 

 224



 

 

19.12: Monopole Problem 
 

Grand unified theory in conjunction with the Big Bang model predicts 
the existence of magnetic monopoles. The mass of the monopole 
should be approximately ten million billion billion times that of the 
proton. New inflation theory predicts that there are many universes 
like several bubbles, and each universe contains one monopole. Again, 
predictions of inflation can not be tested. No monopoles have been 
found. 

In Vedic model the monopoles do not exist. The universe was 
immensely dense in the beginning giving rise to monopoles in the Big 
Bang model. As universes did not possess such high density in the 
Vedic model, the monopoles can not be formed. 
 
 
 

19.13: Entropy Problem 
 

Entropy is the measure of the disorder in a system. According to 
Penrose, the entropy in the early universe was extremely low. The 
universe began as an extremely ordered system. This is in direct 
contradiction with the Big Bang model. 

In the Vedic model, the entropy problem is solved, as the universe 
began with zero entropy. There was no matter and energy at time 
equal to zero, so entropy was zero as well. Since the mass-energy of 
the universe has increased slowly, the entropy has also increased 
slowly. Entropy will reach its maximum value halfway through the 
evolution of the universe, when its expansion comes to a halt. So far 
the universe follows the second law of thermodynamics, which states 
that entropy of a closed system keeps on increasing. During the second 
half of the evolution, entropy will start to decrease and the universe 
will finally end up with zero entropy. 

 225



 

19.14: Antimatter Problem 
 
As matter and antimatter is created and annihilated in pair, in the 
standard Big Bang model there should be same amount of matter 
and antimatter in the universe. However, our universe seems to be 
matter-dominated. Where is the corresponding anti-matter? Are 
there other galaxies made of antimatter in far recesses of the 
universe? 

In the Vedic model, the universe is rotating. So there is a small 
excess of matter over antimatter due to the violation of symmetry. 
As matter and antimatter are continuously being created at the 
surface of the universe from the beginning of the universe with an 
excess creation of matter over antimatter, there is left over matter 
after annihilation of all the antimatter. This small excess of matter 
has accumulated over the age of the universe and our universe 
consists of matter only. 
 
 
 
19.15: Implications of Vedic Model 
 
The universe started with zero value of all properties: volume of the 
universe, hubble velocity, rotational velocity of space, entropy, 
matter content, energy content, temperature etc. All properties are 
well behaved functions in the Vedic model with no singularity at the 
beginning or the end. As space expands and rotates, matter and 
antimatter is created at the surface of the universe. 

In the Vedic model, there is a center of the universe, which is at 
absolute rest. The center of the universe is called Hiranyagarbha, 
Golden Womb, in the Vedas. There is an axis of the universe 
passing through this center around which universe is rotating. This 
axis is represented in Hinduism as Sivalinga. Hindu devotees pour 
milk or water on Sivalinga, which represents the flow of matter and 
energy from the boundary of the universe towards the center of the 
universe. The Vedas tell us that we 

 

 226



 

have a specific location in the universe. It is important to find out the 
center of the universe, the axis of rotation and our location in the 
universe. The model of the universe in the Vedas is illustrated in 
Figure 19.1. Space can be divided in two parts: manifested space and 
unmanifested space. Our universe is the manifested space, and it is 
expanding into unmanifested space creating matter and energy. The 
creation of matter and antimatter continues as long as the universe is 
expanding. As the universe is expanding at present, new matter and 
antimatter is being created at the surface of the universe even now. 
This means that if we look in the direction of the center of the universe, 
we will find older matter, and if we look in the opposite direction we 
will find younger matter. Thus towards the center of the universe older 
galaxies will be seen, while in the opposite direction younger galaxies 
will be seen. The surface of the universe is in a violent state where 
matter and antimatter is being created continuously. It follows that we 
have a specific location in this universe. It will be highly improbable 
that we are at the center of the universe. 

19.16: Cyclic Cosmology 
 

In the Big Bang model the universe can be either open or closed. The 
fate of the universe is decided by the balance of kinetic and potential 
energy. The fate of the universe is often compared with a projectile 
thrown from earth. If the projectile has sufficient velocity, it can 
escape from earth's gravitational pull, otherwise it will reach a 
maximum height and then fall back on earth. In the Vedic model a new 
twist is added to this analogy. Imagine a scenario in which the 
gravitational pull on the projectile increases as it goes further. In this 
case the projectile can never escape from earth's gravitational 
attraction. Similarly, the universe can not keep expanding forever. The 
universe can only reach a maximum size and then collapse back on 
itself. The process of 

 

 227



 

 

Figure 19.1: Vedic model of the universe 

 228



 

formation of the universe and its dissolution carries on according to the 
Vedas. The life of the universe in one cycle is called a "Kalpa". Cyclic 
nature of the universe is described in the famous "Aghamarsana" hymn 
of the Rgveda. Aghamarsana means "sin-effacing" and this hymn is 
recited daily by Brahmanas. 

 

Rgveda 10.190 Sage: Madhuchandasa Aghamarsana; Deity: 
Bhavavrtta; 

Metre: Anustupa 

1. Cosmic law and order were born from the inflaming heat. Then 
night was born and then foaming ocean. 
2. From foaming ocean time was born. Night and day were made by 
the controller of the world like opening and closing of eye. 
3. Founder created sun and moon as earlier, heaven and earth, 
atmosphere and Svah as well. 

 

Lord Krsna says to Arjuna in Gita, the epitome of Hindu 
philosophy: 
 

"O son of Kunti! All beings return to my nature at the end of Kalpa, 
and I create them again in the beginning of Kalpa." 

GIta 9.7 

I control nature and create all these beings dependent on nature
again and again." GIta 9.8 

 

Modern scientists have also considered the possibility of the 
universe expanding and contracting again and again. Cyclic 
cosmology assumes that the universe is closed and collapses back on 
itself and the cycle is repeated. It has been calculated that starlight will 
accumulate from cycle to cycle and it will cause each cycle to be 
longer than the earlier cycle. There can not be more 100 cycles 
according to these calculations. Some 

 

 229



 

researchers have even looked for matter/radiation from earlier 
cycle. 

According to the Vedic model these views about the cyclic 
universe need to be modified. When the universe collapses back, it 
has zero mass-energy. A universe of zero space volume can not 
have any mass-energy, because it can not have any negative 
potential to balance the mass-energy. Thus there is no starlight 
accumulation, and there can not be any matter/radiation from earlier 
cycle in our universe. Each cycle is completely independent, and 
thus there is no limitation on how many cycles there can be. There 
is no way to know about earlier cycle, as no information can travel 
from one cycle to another. 
 
 
 
19.17: Vedic Model and Other Cosmologies 
 
Like the Big Bang model, the Vedic model assumes that the 
universe has started from a point and is expanding. However, 
unlike the Big Bang model universe starts cold with zero mass-
energy, and is rotating as well as expanding. The universe has a 
center, an axis of rotation and a non-spherical shape. There is a 
similarity with the Steady State model that mass-energy is 
constantly being created. The difference is that universe is not 
considered infinitely old, and the creation of mass-energy is only 
during the expansion phase of the universe. During the contraction 
phase, the mass-energy is annihilated, so that universe ends without 
a singularity. Table 19.1 shows the comparison between the Vedic 
and modern cosmologies. 

 

 230



 

Table 19.1: A comparison of Vedic and modem 
cosmologies 

Big Bang Cosmology Steady State Cosmology Vedic Cosmology 
Universe had a beginning Universe had no beginning Universe had a beginning 
Universe is not rotating Universe is not rotating Universe is rotating 
Universe has no center Universe has no center Universe has a center 
Universe is a spherical Universe has no shape Universe is a spheroid 
surface 
Universe has no axis Universe has no axis Universe has an axis 
Universe has no boundary Universe has no boundary Universe has a boundary 
All the mass-energy There was no beginning Mass-energy content was zero 
was created in the in the beginning 
bTehgeirnen isn gn o creation of Mass-energy is Mass-energy is continuously 
mass-energy now continuously being created being created 
There is no creation of Mass-energy is created Mass-energy is created at the 
mass energy taking place everywhere in the surface of the universe 
There is no creation uCnrievaetrisoen  takes place in Creation takes place in the 
of mass-energy the form of hydrogen form of matter and anti-matter 
Universe started very hot aUtonmiv erse was always same Universe started very cold 

Table 19.1:S vnAo dicc Poemripoda rison ofH vmVne dcoicm biannadti onsm odem 
 

cosmologies

 

231



 

232



 

"My suspicion is that the universe is not only queerer 
than we suppose, but queerer than we can suppose." - 

J. B. S. Haldane 
 

20. The Astronomical Code 

Professor Subhash Kak is an eminent scientist, philosopher, and 
Indologist. He has demonstrated that the Brahmi script is derived from 
the earlier Indus-Sarasvati script. In his book "The Astronomical Code 
of the Rgveda" Professor Kak has described the astronomical 
information in the arrangement of the Vedic verses, which will be 
briefly described in this chapter[l]. I will remind my readers that this 
astronomical information is coded in the lay-out of the verses, and it is 
my opinion that there is no astronomical information in the meaning of 
the verses. Subject matter of the Rgveda is cosmology, and not 
astronomy. The interpretation of verses for astronomical dating of the 
Vedas, for example by Jacobi and Tilak, is entirely unsatisfactory. I 
should also stress that What Professor Kak has discovered may only be 
the tip of the iceberg. The Vedas might be carrying much more scientific
information in their arrangement, if the mind-boggling physics of the 
Vedas is any indication. 

 233



 

The Rgveda is divided in two ways. Most commonly, the 
Rgveda is divided in ten books called Mandalas. Each mandala is 
further divided in hymns called Suktas and each Sukta contains 
several verses called Rcas. Each Rca is set to a metre called Chanda. 
There are seven prominent Chandas. Each Chanda has a set number 
of padas, and padas have a set number of syllables. Most popular 
Chanda is Gayatri, which consists of three padas, each of eight 
syllables, thus Gayatri Chanda consists of twenty four syllables. 
Satapatha Brahmana 10.4.2.23-24 describes the Rgveda as having 
432,000 syllables, but actual count is much less, only 394,317. The 
huge gap is irreconcilable, because the Vedas have been extremely 
well preserved. The authors of the Satapatha Brahmana have simply 
assumed the number of syllables in order to give additional meaning 
to the Vedas, again a sign of loss of Vedic science. 

Ten books of the Rgveda contain following number of hymns: 
191,43, 62, 58, 87, 75,104,92,114 and 191 consecutively. The first 
and last books are ascribed to a number of sages, while books two 
to eight are considered family books, each book containing hymns 
by a prominent sage and his family members. We have met these 
sages in a previous chapter. Book nine is also ascribed to a number 
of sages, but the deity of all hymns in this book is Soma, while rest 
of the books contain hymns dedicated to a large number of deities. 
Total number of hymns in the Rgveda is 1017. There are eleven 
additional hymns in the Rgveda called Valakhilya hymns, which are 
found in the eighth book from hymns 49 to 59. The Valakhilya 
hymns consist of eighty verses. Total number of verses in Rgveda is 
10,442 without counting the Valakhilya hymns. 

The Rgveda is also divided in eight parts called Astaka, each 
further subdivided in eight sub-parts called Adhyaya. Thus the 
Rgveda contains sixty four adhyayas. Adhyayas are further divided 
in Vargas. There are 2006 Vargas in the Rgveda. There are varying 
number of verses in each Varga. 

 

 234



 

 

Total number of hymns in the Rgveda is 1017. The Rgveda 
considers universe to be divided in three spaces, thus there are 339 
verses per space. What is the significance of number 339? Number 
339 is related to another sacred Hindu number 108. Hindus recite 
sacred mantras 108 times. Average distance of sun from earth is 
approximately 108 times the diameter of sun and average distance of 
moon from earth is approximately 108 times the diameter of moon. It 
is for this remarkable coincidence that sun and moon seem to be of 
same size as viewed from earth. Number 339 is approximately n 
times number 108. This represents the number of disks of sun or 
moon to cover their paths across sky. Sum of number of hymns in 
books 1 and 10 is 382. Sum of number of hymns in books 2, 3, 5 and 
7 is 296. Number 339 is the average of 296 and 382, and also the 
sum of number of hymns in books 4, 6, 8 and 9. Number 339 is 43 
less than number 382 and 43 greater than 296. Numbers 296,339 and 
382 are the number of sun-steps during the winter solstice, equinox 
and summer solstice respectively. Ratio of 382 to 296 is 1.29 and 
represents the ratio of duration of the longest to the shortest day 
where composition of the Vedas took place. 

The arrangement of hymns in the Vedas contains information 
about sidereal and synodic periods of planets Mercury, Venus, 
Mars, Jupiter and Saturn. Table 20.1 shows the astronomical 
information about synodic periods of planets. 

The probability of these numbers showing up at random is very 
small, and proves that the Vedic sages knew the planetary periods 
well and incorporated that knowledge in the arrangement of the 
Vedas. I hope that one day we will understand the meaning of the 
Vedas completely and appreciate our invaluable Vedic heritage. 

 235



 

 

Table 20.1: Structure of Rgveda and Synodic Period of 
Planets 

Table 19.1:S vnAo dicc Poemripoadr ison ofH vmVne dcoicm biannadti onsm odem 
cosMmeorclougryi es 115.88 118 = Books (2+6) 

Venus 583.92 583 = Books (1+5+9+10) 
Mars 779.94 779 = Books (1+5+7+8+9+10' 
Jupiter 398.88 398 = Books f2+3+5+8+9) 
Saturn 378.09 377 = Books (2+4+5+6+9) 

Table 20.1: SAtrupcptuare nt meaning Scientific meaning 

 236



 

r 
 

Scientific Glossary 
 
 
 
 
 

Vedic term Apparent meaning    Scientific meaning 
 

Hiranya Gold Color of energy 
Salila Water Primordial fluid 
Brhaspati God Brhaspati                          Expansion of the universe 
Indra God Indra                                     Electric force 
Vrtra Demon Vrtra                            Surface tension 
Prthivi Earth                                                 Observer space 
Antariksa Atmosphere       Intermediate space 
Dyau Heaven                                            Light space 
Visnu God Visnu                                   Universe 
Vayu Air                                                        Field 
Agni Fire                                                      Energy 
Apah Water    Matter-antimatter 
Rudra God Rudra                                  Radiation 
Maruta Wind    Radiation pressure 
Gramya Domesticated animal    Boson 
Aranya Wild animal                              Fermion 
Vayavya Bird                                                    Field particle 
Aja Goat Localized energy 
Avi Sheep                                               Avi particle 
Asva Horse                                               Asva particle 
Gau Cow                                                  Gau particle 
Savita God Savita          Creation-annihilation 
                                                            energy 

 
237



 

 

Table 20.1: SAtrupcptuare nt meaning Scientific meaning 
PPulasna ets God Pusa Set of particles 
Varuna God Varuna Electron 
Mitra •G od Mitra Proton 
Aryama God Aryama Neutron 
Soma Soma plant Electric charge 
Indu Soma juice Electricity 
Madhu Honey Magnetic field 
Asvin Twin gods Magnetic poles 
Surya Sun Light 
Usa Dawn Creation of particles 
Nakta Night Particle annihilation 
Vasistha Sage Vasistha Nucleus 
Cakra Wheel Rotation of the universe 

 238



 

 Notes 

Chapter 1: Vedic Legacy 
1. Mimamsaka(1976),p. 40 
2. Satavaiekar (1993) 
3. Ramagopala(1985) 
4. Vidyalankara(1976) 
5. Pandeya(1994) 
6. Upretl(1985) 
7. Vedalankara(1981) 
8. Rajaram(1993),p. 19-20 
9. Das (1921) 
 

Chapter 2: The Time Before Time 
1. Lang (1995), p. 190 
2. Catlin(1996) 
3. Lang (1995), p. 201 
 

Chapter 3: All this is Purusa 
1. Lang (1995), p. 185 
 

Chapter 5: Edge of the Universe 
1. Lang (1995), p. 42-43 
2. Parpola(1994),p.91 

 239



 

Chapter 6: Parallel Spaces 
1. Guggenheim (1952), p. 166 
 

Chapter 9: Quark Confinement 
1. Horgan(1996) 
 

Chapter 10: Matter and Energy 
1. Ne'eman and Kirsh (1996), p. 198 
 

Chapter 11: Electron, Proton and Neutron 
1. Ne'eman and Kirsh (1996), p. 78 
2. Ulansey(1989),p. 36 
3. Ulansey(1989),p. 118 
4. Cumont(1956),p. 190-191 
5. http://users.aol.com/libcfl/xmas.htm 
6. http://www2.xtdl.coni/~stabbott//ancientmithras.htm 
7. Cumont(1956),p. 201 
 

Chapter 13: Let There be Light 
1. Rao and Kak (1998), p. 80 
 

Chapter 14: The Dance of Creation 
1. Tilak(1925) 
 

Chapter 18: Whither Big Bang 
1. Misner, Thorne and Wheeler (1973), p. 704 
2. Parker (1993), p.159-176 and 259-279 
 

Chapter 19: Vedic Cosmology 
1. Nodland and Ralston (1997) 
 

Chapter 20: The Astronomical Code 
1. Kak (1994) 

 

 240



 

Bibliography 

Catlin, G. 1996. Life Among The Indians. London: Bracken 
Books. Cumont, F. 1956. The Mysteries of Mithra. New York: 
Dover Publications. 
 
 
Das, A. C. 1921. Rgvedic India. Bengal, India: University of 
Calcutta Press. 
 

Guggenheim, E. A. 1952. Mixtures. Great Britain: Oxford 
University Press. 
 

Horgan, J. 1996. The End of Science. USA: Addison Wesley. 
 

Kak, S. 1994. The Astronomical Code of the Rgveda. New Delhi: 
Aditya Prakashan. 
 

Lang, A. 1995. Myth, Ritual and Religion, Volume One. London: 
Senate. 
 

Mimamsaka, Y. 1976. Vaidika Siddhmta Mvnimsa. Sonlpata, 
India: Yudhisthira Mimamsaka Publication. Misner, C. W., 
Thorne, K. S., and Wheeler, J. A. 1973. Gravitation. San 
Francisco: W. H. Freeman and Company. 
 

Ne'eman, Y. and Kirsh, Y. 1996. Particle Hunters. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Nodland, B. and Ralston, J. P. 1997. Physical Review Letters. 78, 
Number 16, April 21. 
 

 241



 

 

Pandeya, S. 1994. Brhaspati Svkton KaAlocanatmakaAdhyayna. 
Delhi: Pratibha Prakasana. 
Parker, B. 1993. The Vindication of the Big Bang. New York: Plenum 
Press. 
Parpola, A. 1994. Deciphering the Indus script. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Possehl, G. L. 1996. Indus Age: The Writing System. Philadelphia: 
University of Pennsylvania Press. 
 

Rajaram, N. S. 1993. Aryan Invasion of India, The Myth and the 
Truth. New Delhi: Voice of India. 
Ramagopala. 1985. Vedartha Vimarsa. Punjab, India: Punjab University 
Press. 
Rao and Kak. 1998. Computing Science in Ancient India. Lafayette, 
Louisiana: University of Southwestern Louisiana 
 

Satavalekar, S. D. 1993. Rgveda Ka Subodha Bhasya, Four volumes. 
Paradi, India: Swadhyaya Mandala. Sethna, K. D. i992. The Problem of 
Aryan Origins. New Delhi: Aditya Prakashan. 
 

Tilak, B. G. 1925. The Arctic Home in Vedas. India: Puna Tilak Bros. 
 

Ulansey, D. 1989. The Origins of the Mithraic Mysteries. New York: 
Oxford University Press. 
Upretl, J. 1985. Veda Mem Indra. Delhi: Bharatiya Vidya Prakasana. 
 

Vedalankara, B. 1981. Savita Devata. Delhi: Sri Saraswati Sadana. 
Vidyalankara, R. 1976. Vedon Ki Varmna Sailiyan. Ma: Gurukul 
Kangan Press. 

 242



 

Index 
  

Aditi, 47-48,53,75,79,144, Apollo, 69, 94 Apsara, 
163 188-189 Aptya, 94, 123 

Aditya, 13,48, 86,108,118, Aranya, 35, 115, 123 
126,144, 149, 162, 195 Arjuna, 229 
Agastya, 54-55, 187, 189 Age Aryama, 4, 132, 140, 148-
problem, 208,224 Agni, 149 
36,51,65, 77,81,86, 99-101, Asva, 83,116-120,124,134, 
108, 111, 114, 123- 152 
125,128,130,155,162-163, Asvin,83,108,156-159,195 
186,194,219 Ahi, 13-15 Atri, 190 
Ahuramazda, 142 Aja, 116- Aurobindo, 19 
117, 120,124-125, 129, 134, Avi, 116-118, 124-125,153, 
172 Ajasva, 134 172 
Animal sacrifice, 121-122 Bala, 51, 65-66, 111 
Antariksa, 37,58,71-73,77, Balarama, 196-197 Bali, 
81,84,89,94,108, 150 75 
Antimatter problem, 209, 226 Baryon, 121-122 
Apah, 24-25,46,64,99-102, Bhaga, 168 
110,126,178,189 Bharadvaja, 190 

Bharata, 7,187 
Bharati, 108-110 

 243



 

Big Bang, 35,47,55,57,63-64, Einstein, 45, 116, 193, 202, 
96, 201-210,213-231 Bondi, 217 
Hermann, 204 Boson, 115, Ekata, 123 
121-122 Brahma, 45 Brahma, Electron, 141-142,144,148, 
74, 102, 222 Brahmanaspati, 163,179-180 Eliot, T. S., 
47, 50-52 Brahmanda, 45-46 211 Entropy problem, 
Brhaspati, 47, 50-53, 65, 128, 209,225 Erinnys, Demeter, 
182-183 Capra, Fritjof, 167 83 Fermion, 115,121 
Chokanipok, 42 Cletor, 44 Feynman, Richard, 201 
Copernicus, 202 Cosmic egg, Flatness problem, 207,223 
211 Cosmic tree, 87 Cumont, Gaia, 86 
Franz, 147-148 Cyclic Gamma-ray bursts, 218 
cosmology, 227 Daksa, 47, 53 Gandharva, 118,178 
Dalton, John, 121 Danu, 59 Ganesa, 196, 102,110,135 
Dark matter, 96 Darwin, 197 Garuda, 147 
Das, A. C, 17 Dayananda, 19 Gates, Sylvester James, 92, 
Deluge, 25 Dicke, 207 129 
Digdaha,219 Dvaipayana, Gau, 13-15, 116-117, 124, 
Krsna, 8 Dvita, 123 126-128,152,155,164 
Dyau, 37, 71-73, 77-78, 85, Gauge boson, 122 
89, 94, 99, 108,150 Gautama, 190 Gayatri, 130 
Dyavaprthivl, 73, 85 Gell-Mann, M., 122,133 

Giant tortoise, 89 Gibbs, 72 
Gold, Thomas, 204 Golden 
Womb, 21,226 Gotra, 67 
Gramya, 35-36, 115-117, 
121-127 
Guggenheim, 72 

 

 244



 

Guth, Alan, 216-217 Leontocephalous Kronos, 
Hadron, 122 Haldane, J. 146 
B. S.,233 Hariscandra, Lepton, 121-122 Loka, 58, 
180 Heisenberg, 113, 72, 81 Lopamudra, 54-55 
175 Hera, 94 Hercules, Madhu, 155-156 
68 Mahabharata war, 7,9,145 
Horizon problem, 206, 222 Mahadeva, 222 Mahakala, 
Hoyle, Fred, 204 Hubble, 198-199 Mahapralaya, 33,46 
Edwin, 57, 63, 202 Ila, 108- Mahesa, 74, 222 Mahldhara, 
110 4, 19, 73 Manu, 25-26,49, 
Indra, 13-15,51,56,58-69, 74, 220 Marshall, 38 Martanda, 
76, 101-102, 104-106, 46-48, 220 Martyaloka, 81 
108,111-112, 118, 123-124, Maruta, 31-32,103-106,108, 
126,128,132,146,152,154, 110, 115, 221 Maya, 73,141 
156,165,177,180-183,187- Mayajala, 73 Medusa, 69 
189,221 Indu, 153-154 Meson, 122 
Ioskeha, 60 Jacobi, 17, 233 Mimamsaka, Yudhisthira, 6 
Jaimini, 8 Misner, 206 Mithra, 145-148 
Kak,Subhash, 165,233 Kali, Mitra, 4, 13, 108, 130-132, 
139 Kalpa, 229 Kanva, 190 140-145,148-149,154,162-
Kasyapa, 48,75,102 163,178,187-190 Monopole 
Katyayana, 194 Kautsa, 18 problem, 208,225 Muller, 
Kepler, 202 Kosa, 74 Max, 16,19,109 Nakta, 
Krsna, 17,196-197,229 170,172 Nasadlyahymn,22  
Laksmi, 53 Nataraja, 173,222 
Lee, Tsung-Dao, 213 

 

 245



 

Ne'eman, Yuval, 133 Purusa hymn, 28-30,44 
Neutron, 137, 148-149 Pusa, 116,132-137 Pytho, 
Newton, 116, 161 69 Quark, 122-124 
Nodland, Borge, 214-215 Ralston, John P., 214-215 
Nut, 86 Rama, 196-197 Renan, 
Omorca, 42 Ernest, 139 Rodasi, 103 
Orion, 17 Rohita, 180 Roth, 19 
Osiris, 42 Rudra, 67, 103-104, 108, 
Ouranos, 87 126,132, 135,195,221 
Paila, 8 Russell, Bertrand, 185 
Pangu, 86 Sakala, 4 Sakti, 53, 196 
Pani, 51, 59,181-184 Paradise, Salila, 24-25, 46-47, 101, 
42 Parama Vyoma, 27 115,212 Sambara, 50, 66 
Parasurama, 196-197 Parpola, Sambhu, 103 Sankara, 103 
Asko, 67 Pasu, 114-115, 122, Sankaracarya, 29 Sarama, 
126 Pauli, Wolfgang, 213 181-183 Saranyu, 82-83 
Penrose, Roger, 209, 225 Sarasvati, 107-111 
Persephone, 44 Perseus, 69 Satavalekara, 15,19,170 
Photon, 164 Saunaka, 4,190 Savita, 13-
Prajapati, 10,22, 30,43,61, 14,129-132,134, 137, 
75,114, 117, 195 Proto-Siva, 157,159, 172,219 Sayana, 
135, 137 Proton, 137, 144, 163 19,31,73,110,165 
PrthivT, 37,71-73,77,81,85- Schrodinger, Erwin, 71 
86, 89-91,94-99, 108, 201 Seb, 86 
Pura, 30, 34, 58 Purandara, 58 Sesanaga, 69-70,89,147 
Pururava, 108 Shaw, George Bernard, 45 
Purusa, 29-44,53,58,72,87, 96, Singularity problem, 205 
107, 115-117, 122, 127, 145-
146 

 

 246



■ Index   247 
 
 

Siva, 53, 69, 103, 135, 173, Vaisampayana, 5, 8 
196,199,222 Sivalinga, 226 Vak, 107 
Smrti, 2 Varaha, 62-63,76,140 
Soma, 55, 59, 65-66, 101- Varuna, 4, 13, 65, 67, 101-
102,105,111,118,127,133, 102,108,119,130-132,139-
140,151-154,165,187-188, 143,145,148-149,162-163, 
219 Sruti, 2 168,178-181,187-189 
Steady State, 204,231 Sudasa, Vasistha, 4, 186-191 Vaskali, 
187-189 Sukracarya, 102 102 Vasu, 108, 118, 126, 195 
Sumantu, 8 SunahSepa, 180- Vasumanta, 51 -52 
181 Superspace, 91 Surya, Vaucouleurs, Gerard de, 64 
14,78,100,118,126, 132,161- Vayavya, 35,115,123 Vayu, 
166,168,170,194, 196 36,46,65,71,77,84-85, 99-
Tapa, 23-24 Thomson, J. J., 100, 103, 106, 115, 166,194 
121 Tilak, 17,233 Titus Vedavyasa, 29 Verethraghna, 
Marcus II, 148 Toynbee, 68 Vikramaditya, 198 Visa, 
Arnold, 147 Trisira 221 
Visvarupa, 93-95 Trita, 15, Visnu, 26,46,53,63,65,67, 
63, 94, 120, 123 Triton, 120 70*, 74-77, 102, 147, 165, 
Trtsu, 187 Tryon, Ed, 216 195-196,212-213,219,222 
Tvasta, 59, 82,93, 178 Visvamitra,4,112,186,190 
Unicorn, 40,42 Uranus, 86 Vivangahvanta, 49 
UrvasI, 188-189 Ufa, Vivasvana, 25,48-49,82-83, 
66,163,165-173,187 Uwata, 220 
19 Vivekananda, 1 Vrtra, 56, 58-

63, 68-69, 74, 89, 94, 105, 
111, 140, 146, 150,165, 
183,221 Vrtraghna, 68 
Weinberg, Steven, 21 Wilson, 
Greg, 148 

 247



248   Vedic Physics 
 

Wu, Chien Shung,213 
Yajiia, 34-36,61,75,80,115, 
122,149,154,159,194,219 
Yajnavalkya, 5 
Yama, 48-49, 83, 118, 131, 
177-179 
Yarni, 83, 177-179 
Yang, 86 
Yang, ChenNing, 213 
Yaska, 31 Yima, 49 Yin, 
86 Ymir, 42 
Zagreus, Dionysus, 42 
Zeus, 44, 83 Zweig, 
George, 122 Zwicky, 
Fritz, 63 

 

 248



249   Vedic Physics 

 

249



 
 

 250



 

V 

 251



 
 

V 

252
 



 
 

V 

 253



 

 

 254